===== PAGE 1 =====

This article was downloaded by: [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center]
On: 26 September 2012, At: 07:20
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Ergonomics
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/terg20
Effects of handicraft sitting postures on lower trunk
muscle fatigue
Pattanasin Areeudomwong a , Rungthip Puntumetakul b , David B. Kaber c , Sawitri Wanpen b
, Naruemon Leelayuwat d & Uraiwan Chatchawan b
a Department of Physical Therapy, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand
b Back, Neck and Other Joint Pain Research Group, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand
c Edward P . Fitts Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, North Carolina State
University, NC, USA
d Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand
Version of record first published: 29 Mar 2012.
To cite this article: Pattanasin Areeudomwong, Rungthip Puntumetakul, David B. Kaber, Sawitri Wanpen, Naruemon
Leelayuwat & Uraiwan Chatchawan (2012): Effects of handicraft sitting postures on lower trunk muscle fatigue, Ergonomics,
55:6, 693-703
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2012.658086
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to
anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses should
be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims,
proceedings, demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in
connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Eﬀects of handicraft sitting postures on lower trunk muscle fatigue
Pattanasin Areeudomwong a, Rungthip Puntumetakul b*, David B. Kaber c, Sawitri Wanpen b,
Naruemon Leelayuwat d and Uraiwan Chatchawan b
aDepartment of Physical Therapy, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand; bBack, Neck and Other Joint Pain Research Group,
Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand; cEdward P. Fitts Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, North Carolina
State University, NC, USA; dDepartment of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand
(Received 1 September 2011; ﬁnal version received 11 January 2012 )
The purpose of this study was to assess trunk muscle fatigue in seated handicraft tasks using surface
electromyography (sEMG) and visual analogue scale (VAS) ratings for trunk discomfort, and to assess the
relationship of these responses. Twenty-three participants were randomly assigned to assumed crossed-leg and
heel sitting postures for 30 min. Normalised median frequency (NMF) slopes for lumbar multiﬁdus (LM) and
internal oblique (IO) muscles and VAS ratings were recorded. Results revealed that the crossed-leg posture produced
signiﬁcantly steeper NMF slopes for both sides of the LM and IO muscles than heel sitting. Greater VAS
ratings were found in crossed-leg sitting posture than the heel sitting posture. The NMF slopes and the VAS ratings
had signiﬁcant negative correlations for both postures. Findings support heel sitting in handicraft tasks over
crossed-leg sitting due to greater trunk muscle fatigue and discomfort during the latter posture. Results support
VAS ratings as a complementary method to sEMG for identifying trunk muscle fatigue.
Practitioner Summary: Trunk muscle fatigue in handicraft work is a potential risk for low back pain. Based on
EMG and discomfort analyses, heel sitting is preferred to crossed-leg posture. Discomfort ratings are consistent
with EMG measures in identifying trunk muscle fatigue in such postures.
Keywords: trunk muscle fatigue; body discomfort; surface electromyography; visual analogue scale; normalised
median frequency slope
1. Introduction
Handicraft work is one of the major export products in Southeast Asia, including Thailand. In 2005, it
was estimated that approximately 1.08 million Thai people worked in domestic or cottage industries
making handicrafts (Oﬃce of the National Economic and Social Development Board 2009). Of these persons,
54.3% are males (Teeratrakul et al. 2009). Due to the nature of work tasks in these industries and the
available workstation resources, workers use ﬂoor-sitting postures and are not likely to use chairs or western
sitting styles. Floor sitting postures, particularly crossed-leg and heel sitting postures, are popular among Thai
people for these types of activities (see Figure 1). Workers often assume such postures for prolonged periods,
which is likely to be one risk factor for low back pain (LBP) (Solomonow et al. 2003, Keawduangdee et al.
2011).
Prolonged non-neutral static postures, such as seated postures, can increase the fatigability of the lumbo-pelvic
muscles, particularly the lumbar multiﬁdus (LM) and internal oblique (IO) muscles (Harrison et al. 1999). These
muscles represent a local system for counterbalancing compressive forces on the upper lumbar segment of the spine
and to increase lumbar stability (Kavcic et al. 2004) throughout the sitting period. Sustained contraction of these
back muscles in seated postures has been identiﬁed as a cause of increased back muscle fatigue (van Diee ¨ n et al.
1997) and may eventually lead to development of LBP (Frymoyer et al. 1980, Wilder et al. 1988). Although previous
research has reported ﬁndings on the eﬀect of seated postures on back muscle activity and fatigue (Nag et al. 1986),
to date no study has evaluated LM and IO muscle fatigue in ﬂoor sitting postures, particularly in crossed-leg and
heel sitting postures in Thai cottage industry workers. The correlation of measures of muscle fatigue and discomfort
has also not been assessed in this work context.
Surface electromyography (sEMG) is a non-invasive muscle activity measurement method that can also be
used to objectively assess muscle fatigue (De Luca 1993, Dedering et al. 1999, 2002) and fatigue rates. Fatigue
during sustained contractions is characterised by a shift in the power spectrum of the EMG signal or spectral
*Corresponding author. Email: rungthip@kku.ac.th
Ergonomics
Vol. 55, No. 6, June 2012, 693–703
ISSN 0014-0139 print/ISSN 1366-5847 online
/C2112012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2012.658086
http://www.tandfonline.com
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 3 =====

compression (Ng et al. 1997). The median frequency (MF) value is the most commonly used outcome
measurement of sEMG for assessing muscle fatigue (De Luca 1997, Mannion et al. 1997, Roy et al. 1997,
Sparto et al. 1997). A decrease in the MF of the EMG power spectrum or a decrease in its slope during an
isometric contraction is an indicator of myoelectric muscle fatigue (Biedermann et al. 1991, De Luca 1997). In
general, the slope of the MF reﬂects muscle fatigue and has been widely used to predict and investigate back
muscle fatigue (Biedermann et al. 1991).
Many subjective measurement techniques have been developed in the literature for assessing body discomfort,
including Borg ratings (Dedering et al. 1999, 2002, Yassierli and Nussbaum 2007) and the visual analogue scale
(VAS) ratings (Lyons et al. 1993, Kumar 2006). The VAS is a general instrument that can be customised to
applications in terms of scale conﬁguration. For example, VAS scales have been used to measure trunk discomfort
(Kumar 2006). VAS ratings of postural comfort are inexpensive, eﬃcient and practical for almost any ﬁeld setting.
Lyons et al. (1993) also demonstrated the use of VAS ratings to measure fatigue of masseter and temporalis muscles.
They found a signiﬁcant relationship between VAS ratings and MF shift of EMG. However, no previous research
has studied handicraft ﬂoor sitting postures using sEMG measures of lower trunk muscle fatigue and VAS ratings
of discomfort.
Therefore the purpose of this study was to: (1) assess trunk muscle fatigue in seated handicraft tasks using
sEMG analysis along with lower trunk discomfort using VAS ratings and (2) identify any relationship between VAS
ratings and sEMG measures as indicators of muscle fatigue.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
Twenty-three healthy Thai male participants were recruited for the study from the general population of the
Khon Kaen City area. We elected to study male subjects, in part, based on the demographics of the Thai
cottage industry working population and to provide some initial insight into the role of common work postures
in muscle activity and back pain. Participants had a mean age of 21.6 years (SD ¼ +2.55, range ¼ 20–30),
mean height of 168.57 cm (SD ¼+ 4.57, range ¼ 161–180), and mean weight of 58.16 kg (SD ¼+ 5.38,
range ¼ 50–68). All participants reported daily work activities involving the crossed-leg and heel sitting postures
(on a ﬂoor) for at least 30 min. Furthermore, all participants reported experience in these postures for at least
eight years. We ensured through an initial survey that participants had similar levels of experience with the test
postures through their work activities.
None of the participants reported LBP in advance of testing nor did they have documented spinal disorders (e.g.
scoliosis, spondylolisthesis, lumbar herniated nucleus palposus, ankylosing spondylitis), neurological conditions
(numbness or loss of sensation in the trunk and/or legs before testing), recent lumbo-pelvic and/or abdominal
surgery, or abnormal muscle contractions. The participants also did not exhibit pain symptoms during rest or test
periods (including back pain, leg pain or numbness at the back or their legs). All participants signed an informed
consent form to participate in the study. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee for Human Research at
Khon Kaen University.
Figure 1. Images of Thai handicraft work being performed in typical crossed-leg and heel sitting postures.
694 P. Areeudomwong et al.
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 4 =====

2.2. Experiment design
2.2.1. Variables
The independent variable for this study was the type of sitting posture, including: crossed-leg and heel sitting
postures. These postures were observed in visits to domestic and cottage workshops producing handicrafts in the
Khon Kaen area. The postures were assumed by the vast majority of workers and for extended periods of time of
30 min or greater. The dependent variables included normalised MF slope using sEMG for measuring lower trunk
muscle fatigue in the sitting postures and lower trunk discomfort ratings using a VAS presented to participants at
the end of sitting periods. A within-subjects design was followed in which all participants were exposed to the two
posture positions. The order of the exposure was randomised across participants.
2.2.2. Procedures
The study was conducted in the Associated Medical Sciences Laboratory at Khon Kaen University. Although the
intent was to demonstrate the impact of actual industry work task postures on muscle fatigue and discomfort, a
controlled lab investigation was initially conducted to isolate posture position eﬀects on the responses as well as any
relation among the sEMG measures and VAS ratings. This study was expected to motivate a follow-on ﬁeld
investigation. For each participant, the experiment was administered across two consecutive days with a 24-hr break
between sessions. The equivalent of a one-day ‘wash-out period’ was used between postures according to the
methodology described by Jones et al. (2004).
Participants were initially provided with a familiarisation session outlining the two sitting postures. They were
also shown pictures of the postures, as typically assumed by workers in Thai cottage industry during daily work
tasks. Participants practiced the sitting postures until they could readily assume and maintain the task position.
Subsequently, a researcher asked the participants to rest in a supine lying position for 10 min (Jones et al. 2004).
Participants then sat unsupported on a cushion for 30 min in the crossed-leg or heel sitting posture depending upon
their random sequence assignment. During the sitting period, a small vertical stand was placed behind participants
and they were instructed by a researcher to adjust their posture position in order to maintain point of contact
between the stand and the L3 spinous process level on the back. Participants did not lean or apply any signiﬁcant
pressure to the stand. In addition, all participants were instructed to look at a designated point 1.5 m in front of
them at seated eye level.
To perform the crossed-leg sitting posture, participants were asked to sit with their thorax relaxed. Both hips
and knees were ﬂexed with the calf of each leg placed on the top of the opposite foot with the lower leg resting on the
cushion (see Figure 2a; posture referenced from [Thailand] Oﬃce of the National Culture Commission 2009). To
perform the heel sitting posture, participants were asked to sit with their thorax relaxed. Both hips and knees were
fully ﬂexed and contacted the seat cushion, and both feet were in dorsiﬂexion with ischial tuberosities resting on the
heels (see Figure 2b; posture referenced from Oﬃce of the National Culture Commission 2009). Each sitting posture
was performed for 30 min on separate days.
2.2.3. Data collection
The skin over the boundaries of both sides of the LM and IO muscles was prepared by shaving hair at electrode
sites, cleaning sites with alcohol and abrading skin using ﬁne sandpaper in order to reduce skin impedance to less
than 5 k O (Hermens et al. 2000). Two pairs of active adhesive disposable Ag/AgCl disc surface electrodes (EL 503,
BIOPAC Systems, California) were then placed parallel to the both sides of the muscles (O’Sullivan et al. 2006). For
the LM muscle, this was a location at the level of the L5 vertebrae, parallel to an imaginary line between the
posterior superior iliac spine and the L1–L2 interspinous space (De Foa et al. 1989). For the IO muscle, this was a
location 1 cm from the anterior superior iliac spine towards the median plane (De Luca 1993). The centre-to-centre
distance of electrodes was 2.5 cm. Two ground electrodes were placed on both anterior superior iliac spines and iliac
crests. Snap leads were connected between surface electrodes and ampliﬁers to transfer signals, and all electrodes
were taped to avoid lead movement.
A Biopac MP 35 sEMG system (Goleta, California) was used to continuously record EMG signals during the
sitting periods. The sampling rate was 1000 Hz with a signal ampliﬁcation of gain 6 1000 and a common mode
rejection ratio (CMRR) of 85 dB. A bandpass ﬁlter was applied to the data with lower and upper cutoﬀ frequencies
of 30 Hz and 500 Hz, respectively. A personal computer with an A/D converter was used to analyse the EMG data.
A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied with 1-s data epochs (including 1000 data points) and used to
Ergonomics 695
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 5 =====

calculate the signal spectrum (Stulen and De Luca 1981). All test trial MF data were normalised based on
participant initial MF values at rest. Linear regression analysis was applied to the normalised MF observations
(1800) during each 30-min sitting period in order to determine the normalised MF slope (NMF slope). The NMF
slope was deﬁned as the MF slope divided by the initial MF value and expressed in per cent per second.
In order to assess lower trunk discomfort, a VAS was presented to participants at the end of each 30-min sitting
period. The scale was based on Kumar’s (2006) research and was a 10 cm horizontal line with anchors at the two
ends reading ‘no discomfort at all’ and ‘worst imaginable discomfort’. The ratings were also used to identify any
correlation of lower trunk discomfort with sEMG measures of trunk muscle fatigue.
2.2.4. Hypotheses
Kiefer et al. (1998) claimed that muscle activation in a neutral sitting posture, under upper body load, involves a subtle
but distinct local muscle recruitment pattern, especially for the LM and IO muscles, in order to maintain an equilibrium
posture. On this basis and Harrison et al. (1999) ﬁndings, it was expected that prolonged exposure to the crossed-leg
and heel sitting postures would lead to fatigue of the trunk muscles, speciﬁcally the LM and IO muscles (Hypothesis (H)
1). Since heel sitting represented a near-neutral sitting posture, it was hypothesised to produce less fatigue in the lower
trunk muscles and discomfort when compared with the crossed-leg sitting posture (H2).
It was further expected that the EMG measures of LM and IO muscle fatigue in the ﬂoor sitting postures would
be related to the VAS discomfort ratings. Normalised MF slope was expected to be negatively correlated with VAS
ratings; that is, as lower trunk muscle fatigue increased (and the NMF slope decreased), lower trunk discomfort
ratings were expected to increase over the period of sitting (H3). This expectation was based on prior observation of
a dependence among objective and subjective measures of muscle fatigue and discomfort, respectively (Dedering
et al. 1999, Vergara and Page 2002) as well as Lyons et al. (1993) ﬁndings that VAS ratings were an indicator of
masticatory muscle fatigue.
2.2.5. Statistical analysis
SPSS version 19.0 for Windows (Chicago, IL) was used for all statistical analyses. Diagnostics were initially performed
on the NMF slope response determined for both sides of the LM and IO muscles for each participant in each sitting
posture for the 30 min test period. Shapiro–Wilk’s test results revealed the MF data to conform with the normality
assumption for parametric statistical tests. Levine’s test conﬁrmed conformance of the MF data with the parametric test
assumption of constant variance. The data were subsequently analysed using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with sitting posture and muscle as the independent variables. When a signiﬁcant sitting posture 6 muscle interaction
eﬀect was detected, pair-wise comparisons were used to examine diﬀerences between the postures for each muscle.
Figure 2. (a) Crossed-leg sitting posture. (b) Heel sitting posture.
696 P. Areeudomwong et al.
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 6 =====

Lower trunk muscle discomfort, measured by VAS ratings, was compared between the crossed-leg and heel
sitting postures with independent t-test.
For the correlation analyses on the two response measures, Pearson product–moment correlation coeﬃcients ( r)
were determined to quantify the degree of linear association between the NMF slope for the right LM and IO
muscles and the VAS ratings in the crossed-leg and heel sitting postures. We assumed equal fatigue rates for both
sides of the muscles in symmetrical sitting postures. An alpha level of 0.05 was deﬁned as representing statistical
signiﬁcance. Interpretation of the correlation coeﬃcients was as follows: 0.0–0.25 – little correlation; 0.26–0.49 – low
correlation; 0.50–0.69 – moderate correlation; 0.70–0.89 – high correlation and 0.90–1.00 – very high correlation.
3. Results
A two-way ANOVA was applied to the mean magnitude of the NMF slope response. Results revealed a statistically
signiﬁcant sitting posture 6 muscle interaction eﬀect on the slope ( F(3,176) ¼ 2.949, p ¼ 0.034) (see Table 1 and
Figure 3). Pair-wise comparisons revealed the crossed-leg sitting posture to produce a signiﬁcantly steeper NMF
slope (more negative) for both sides of LM and IO muscles than the heel sitting posture ( p 5 0.001). The mean
diﬀerences in NMF slope between the two sitting postures were: 70.062 + 0.025%/s for right LM muscle (with
95% conﬁdence interval, CI 7 0.072 to 7 0.053); 70.064 + 0.018%/s for left LM muscle (with 95% CI 7 0.073
to 7 0.055); 7 0.077 + 0.021%/s for right IO muscle (with the 95%CI 7 0.086 to 7 0.068); and 7 0.077 + 0.019%/
s for left IO muscle (with the 95% CI 7 0.086 to 7 0.068).
A t-test revealed signiﬁcantly greater discomfort in the lower trunk ( t(44) ¼ 3.722, p ¼ 0.001), measured with the
VAS, for the crossed-leg sitting posture than for the heel sitting posture. The mean diﬀerence between the postures
was 2.01 + 1.86 cm, 95%CI 0.92 to 3.09; p ¼ 0.001) (see Figure 4).
Table 1. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) testing the eﬀects of sitting posture and muscle on mean magnitude of
normalised median frequency slope ( n ¼ 23).
Eﬀect df F-value p-value
Posture 1 909.929 50.001*
Muscle 3 10.701 50.001*
Posture 6 muscle 3 2.949 50.034*
Note: n ¼ group size; *statistically signiﬁcant ( p 5 0.05).
Figure 3. Means and standard deviation (SD) of NMF slope (%) for right lumbar multiﬁdus (Rt. LM), left lumbar multiﬁdus
(Lt. LM), right internal oblique (Rt. IO) and left internal oblique (Lt. IO) for the crossed-leg sitting posture (dash line) and heel
sitting posture (solid line) ( n ¼ 23) (* p 5 0.001).
Ergonomics 697
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 7 =====

The correlation analyses yielded coeﬃcients demonstrating highly signiﬁcant negative linear associations
between the NMF slope and the VAS ratings of discomfort for the right LM and IO muscles in the crossed-leg
sitting posture ( r ¼7 0.85 for right LM muscle; p 5 0.001, and r ¼70.86 for right IO muscle; p 5 0.001).
Similarly, Pearson product–moment coeﬃcients revealed highly signiﬁcant negative correlations among the
EMG response and the VAS ratings in the heel sitting posture ( r ¼ 70.84 for right LM muscle; p 5 0.001, and
r ¼70.85 for right IO muscle; p 5 0.001). The correlation analysis results are also presented in Figure 5. The results
for the left LM and IO muscles were similar to those shown for the right side.
4. Discussion
The purpose of this study was to assess trunk muscle fatigue in seated handicraft tasks using sEMG analysis
and VAS ratings for lower trunk discomfort, and to identify any relation of sEMG and VAS ratings for
indicating trunk muscle fatigue in cottage industry work tasks. In general, we found that the crossed-leg and
heel sitting postures were fatiguing to the LM and IO muscles. This ﬁnding supported H1. Results also
indicated that fatigue and VAS ratings for lower trunk discomfort were greater for the crossed-leg versus heel
sitting posture for the 30-min sitting period. These results supported H2. In addition, muscle fatigue was
signiﬁcantly correlated with VAS ratings, speciﬁcally decreases in NMF slope occurred with increases in
discomfort ratings during both crossed-leg and heel sitting. This ﬁnding supported H3. On the basis of these
results, it can be inferred that trunk muscle fatigue led to the development of perceptions of discomfort for
participants in the seated postures. Furthermore, it appears that the heel sitting posture is more resistant to
lower trunk muscle fatigue and lower trunk discomfort than the crossed-leg sitting posture. In addition, the
objective and subjective assessments of muscle fatigue are largely concordant for the speciﬁc task postures
examined in this study. Below we provide some explanations for these ﬁndings.
Although the crossed-leg and heel sitting postures are both symmetrical ﬂoor sitting postures, when observing
participants during the two data collection sessions, the lumbo-pelvic posture position was found to be diﬀerent.
The diﬀerence in postures may have resulted from diﬀerent centres of gravity which result from diﬀerent positioning
of the trunk. Consequently, the two postures require diﬀerent levels of LM and IO muscle activities to maintain
position. Trunk position in diﬀerent unsupported sitting postures could preferentially facilitate distinct LM and IO
activations (O’Sullivan et al. 2006). Furthermore, it has been reported that the activation of low back muscles,
especially the LM muscle, can be highly related to fatigue (van Diee ¨ n et al. 1993). Thus, it is likely that the
biomechanical diﬀerence of the trunk position aﬀected trunk muscle fatigue at diﬀerent levels (Champagne et al.
2008).
There are two possible explanations for the ﬁnding that crossed-leg sitting produced greater LM and IO muscle
fatigue and discomfort ratings for the lower trunk than the heel sitting posture. First, the crossed-leg sitting posture
may have a mechanical disadvantage compared to the heel sitting posture. In the crossed-leg sitting posture, the hip
Figure 4. Means and standard deviation (SD) of VAS (cm) at 30 min for the crossed-leg and heel sitting postures ( n ¼ 23)
(*p ¼ 0.001).
698 P. Areeudomwong et al.
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 8 =====

Figure 5. Correlation between the NMF slope and VAS of right lumbar multiﬁdus muscle (A) and right internal oblique muscle (B) in the crossed-leg sitti ng posture, and
right lumbar multiﬁdus muscle (C) and right internal oblique muscle (D) in heel sitting posture ( n ¼ 23).
Ergonomics 699
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 9 =====

joint was at approximately 90 degrees of ﬂexion and almost fully externally rotated. This particular position of the
joint may cause the sitter to lean their trunk forward due to decreased thigh-trunk angle (Harrison et al. 1999). This
trunk posture, with the line of thrust from the centre of gravity passing in front of the spine and ischial tuberosities,
would cause greater LM and IO muscle activity, and more rapidly lead to fatigue due to an increasing ﬂexor
moment arm at the lumbar spine (see Figure 6). Although Nag et al. (1986) observed that back muscle activity was
reduced in a crossed-leg sitting posture, they measured erector spinae muscle activity, which is located at a
superﬁcial level in the back and only acts as a prime mover in posture positioning. In contrast, the LM muscle acts
as a synergist (stabilisation) muscle in the crossed-leg sitting posture (Bergmark 1989). Thus, the LM muscle may
increase in activity in order to maintain the stability of the sitting posture. Second, the LM muscle may be passively
stretched by inclination of the forward trunk as eﬀected in the crossed-leg sitting posture. The muscle then increases
in tension to pull on the lumbar spine and resists the increase of the ﬂexor moment arm. This tension maintains
equilibrium of the sitting posture and prevents the individual from falling forward (Corlett 2008). The tension
generation of the muscle may contribute to a greater sensation of discomfort in the lower trunk by stimulating
mechanoreceptors located in muscles and tendons (Keyserling et al. 2005). While the LM is being passively
stretched, the IO muscle may respond by increasing its co-contraction activity to balance forces with the other back
muscles; ultimately, this would induce greater IO muscle fatigue in the crossed-leg sitting posture.
With greater trunk erection in the heel sitting posture, the LM and IO muscles are comparatively less active than
in crossed-leg sitting, since the centre of gravity passes posteriorly and nearer to the fulcrum of the lumbar spine.
Thus, the heel sitting posture can be described as a near-neutral sitting posture. In addition, the heel sitting posture
may produce a lower ﬂexor moment arm for the upper body (see Figure 7). Kiefer et al. (1998) claimed that muscle
activation in the neutral sitting posture, under upper body load, may cause a subtle but distinct recruitment pattern
among local muscles, especially the LM and IO, in order to maintain an equilibrium posture. We also observed that
the lordotic curve of the lumbar spine in heel sitting more closely approximated the curve of the spine when
standing. The LM muscle in heel sitting may also be less passively stretched as compared to crossed-leg sitting;
therefore, the heel sitting posture showed less LM and IO fatigue. Related to this, VAS ratings for the heel sitting
posture were lower than for crossed-leg sitting, corresponding with lower LM and IO muscle fatigue.
Results clearly revealed that NMF slopes for the right LM and IO muscles decreased as VAS ratings increased
(representing higher trunk discomfort). This may be due, in part, to the susceptibility of the trunk muscles to
Figure 6. Flexor moment arm of lumbar multiﬁdus muscle and centre of gravity of the participant while in the crossed-leg
sitting posture.
Figure 7. Flexor moment arm of lumbar multiﬁdus muscle and centre of gravity of the participant while in the heel sitting
posture.
700 P. Areeudomwong et al.
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 10 =====

fatigue, leading to increased segmental instability (Hansen et al. 1998) and discomfort. Sustained static muscle
contraction without trunk movement in such postures may induce metabolite accumulation in the trunk muscles
and lead to fatigue development (Pope et al. 2002). Related to this, previous research proposed that prolonged
sitting positions may cause trunk muscle fatigue (Frymoyer et al. 1980, Wilder et al. 1988). Among other actions,
the LM and IO muscles provide lumbo-pelvic stability and directly control lumbar spinal segments (O’Sullivan et al.
2006). Fatigue of these muscles may lead to decreased stability of the lumbar spine (Todd et al. 2007). Such
segmental instability may cause overloading of vertebral structures (Hansen et al. 1998, Pope et al. 2002).
Overloading of the vertebral structures and development of lower trunk muscle fatigue during prolonged sustained
contraction may provoke the observed discomfort in the lower trunk of sitters (Hansen et al. 1998, Allen et al.
2008). Although, one prior study did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant correlation between MF and VAS ratings (Lyons et al. 1993),
results were based on masseter and temporalis muscle responses. This study focused on trunk MF and discomfort in
common industry work postures.
Previous research has indicated that participants may over- or under-estimate feelings of ‘lower trunk
discomfort’ versus ‘pain’ when using the VAS ratings (Callaghan et al. 2010). However, other research indicates this
ﬁnding may be dependent on participant experience with the measurement methodology (Dedering et al. 2002). For
this reason, all participants in this study were familiarised and had practice with the VAS ratings before data
collection. Subjective ratings using VASs may also depend on participant prior experiences of physical tasks and
coping strategies. Participants in this study were all consistently trained in the two sitting postures before data
collection. Consequently, all participants had suﬃcient experience with the speciﬁc VAS to make accurate ratings of
postural discomfort based on their feelings. Related to this, the VAS ratings of discomfort by experienced
participants could be used to describe seat comfort and as a basis for design.
The ﬁndings of this study suggest that a heel sitting posture is superior to a crossed-leg posture in terms of trunk
muscle fatigue and discomfort, when workers need to perform ﬂoor activities. This ﬁnding is not limited in
applicability to handicraft workers in Thailand, as such postures are adopted in a variety of occupational and
domestic settings in many countries throughout Asia and Africa. For example, similar and extended crossed-leg
postures are assumed by workers in African countries and India involved in clay pottery making tasks in which the
product is held between the legs or adjacent to the legs.
There are some limitations of this study that should be noted relative to application of the results. First, the
heel sitting posture investigated here may not be a possible position for people to maintain, if they have knee
and/or ankle pain. This posture is likely to produce more compressive force on the knees and ankles and would
not be comfortable or healthy for such individuals. Second, it is important to note that we only investigated
fatigue in the LM and IO muscles in very speciﬁc sitting postures, including crossed-leg and heel sitting.
Therefore, this study does not reﬂect fatigue in other areas of the body in diﬀerent posture positions. Third,
ischemic eﬀects and pain or numbness in the legs during sitting might have inﬂuenced LM and IO muscle
fatigue and perceptions of discomfort, confounding participant VAS ratings. For this reason, advance screening
of participant condition was conducted; however, it is possible that some persons had prior conditions. Fourth,
this study included only male participants. Although the observed demographics of workers in the Thai cottage
industry (Teeratrakul et al. 2009) include a slight majority of males, females account for approximately 45% of
the current working population. Consequently, additional data is needed on the female segment of the
handicraft worker population for making further inferences about muscle activity level and pain. Finally, this
study was conducted in a laboratory setting. Future studies should include female participants and be
conducted in ﬁeld settings in order to promote the validity of results.
5. Conclusion
The ﬁndings of this study revealed that ﬂoor sitting postures in handicraft work can be fatiguing to lower trunk
muscles and cause low back discomfort over time. Among common postures observed in Thai handicraft industries,
heel sitting may be a preferred posture choice when performing work tasks on a ﬂoor. The heel sitting posture causes
less fatigue in lower trunk muscles and discomfort than a common crossed-leg sitting posture in a healthy person
without pre-existing knee and ankle pain. It is also superior in terms of these responses during prolonged ﬂoor
activity (30 min). In addition, ﬁndings reveal that VAS discomfort ratings are a complementary indicator of lower
trunk muscle fatigue levels to sEMG for cottage industry work tasks.
Future studies should be conducted on fatigue and discomfort measurement in both trunk and leg muscles in
other ﬂoor sitting postures. Finally, this study did not address the issue of whether lower trunk discomfort in
participants is inﬂuenced by central or peripheral fatigue mechanisms or both. Therefore, it would be worthwhile for
Ergonomics 701
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 11 =====

future studies to discriminate causes of lower trunk discomfort when maintaining crossed-leg and heel sitting
postures, as well as other postures.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by grants from the Back, Neck and Other Joint Pain Research Group, the Research and Training
Centre for Enhancing Quality of Life of Working-Age People, and Khon Kaen University. David Kaber’s work on this study
was supported by a grant from the US National Institute for Occupational Safety & Health (NIOSH) (No. 2 T42 OH008673–06).
The opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of NIOSH.
References
Allen, D.G., Lamb, G.D., and Westerblad, H., 2008. Skeletal muscle fatigue: cellular mechanisms. Physiological Reviews , 88,
287–332.
Bergmark, A., 1989. Stability of the lumbar spine. A study in mechanical engineering. Acta Orthopedica Scandinavica Suppl , 230,
1–54.
Biedermann, H.J., Shanks, G.L., Forrest, W.J. and Inglis, J., 1991. Power spectrum analyses of electromyographic activity.
Spine, 16, 1179–1184.
Callaghan, J.P., Gregory, D.E., and Durkin, J.L., 2010. Do NIRS measures relate to subjective low back discomfort during
sedentary tasks? International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics , 40, 165–170.
Champagne, A., Descarreaux, M., and Lafond, D., 2008. Back and hip extensor muscles fatigue in healthy subjects: task-
dependency eﬀect of two variants of the Sorensen test. European Spine Journal , 17, 1721–1726.
Corlett, E.N., 2008. Sitting as a hazard. Safety Science , 46, 815–821.
Dedering, A˚ ., Nemeth, G., and Harms-Ringdahl, K., 1999. Correlation between electromyographic spectral changes and subjective
assessment of lumbar muscle fatigue in subjects without pain from the lower back. Clinical Biomechanics, 14, 103–111.
Dedering, A˚ ., Oddsson, L., Harms-Ringdahl, K. and Ne ´ meth, G., 2002. Electromyography and rating of lumbar muscle fatigue
using a four-level staircase protocol. Clinical Biomechanics , 17, 171–176.
De Foa, J.L., Forrest, W., and Biedermann, H.J., 1989. Muscle ﬁbre direction of longissimus, iliocostalis and multiﬁdus:
landmark-derived reference lines. Journal of Anatomy , 163, 243–247.
De Luca, C.J., 1993. Use of the surface EMG signal for performance evaluation of back muscles. Muscle & Nerve , 16, 210–216.
De Luca, C.J., 1997. The use of surface electromyography in biomechanics. Journal of Applied Biomechanics , 113, 135–163.
Frymoyer, J.W., Pope, M.H., Costanza, M.C., Rosen, J.C., Goggin, J.E. and Wilder, D.G., 1980. Epidemiologic studies of low
back pain. Spine, 5, 419–423.
Hansen, L., Winkel, J., and Jørgensen, K., 1998. Signiﬁcance of mat and shoe softness during prolonged work in upright
position: based on measurements of low back muscle EMG, foot volume changes, discomfort and ground force reactions.
Applied Ergonomics , 29, 217–224.
Harrison, D.D., Harrison, S.O., Croft, A.C., Harrison, D.E. and Troyanovich, S.J., 1999. Sitting biomechanics part I: review of
the literature. Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics , 22, 594–609.
Hermens, H.J., Feriks, B., Disselhorst-Klug, C. and Rug, G., 2000. Development of recommendations for SEMG sensors and
sensor placement procedures. Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology , 10, 361–374.
Jones, D., Round, J., and de Haan, A., 2004. Skeletal muscle from molecules to movement . London: Churchill Livingstone.
Kavcic, N., Grenier, S., and McGill, S.M., 2004. Determining the stabilizing role of individual torso muscles during
rehabilitation exercises. Spine, 29, 1254–1265.
Keawduangdee, P., Puntumetakul, R., Chatchawan, U. and Kaber, D. (2012). Prevalence and associated risk factors of low-back
pain in textile ﬁshing net manufacturing. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries , (in press).
Keyserling, W.M., Sudarsan, S.P., Martin, B.J., Haig, A.J. and Armstrong, T.J., 2005. Eﬀects of low back disability status on
lower back discomfort during sustained and cyclical trunk ﬂexion. Ergonomics, 48, 219–233.
Kiefer, A., Shirazi-Adl, A., and Parnianpour, M., 1998. Synergy of the human spine in neutral postures. European Spine Journal ,
7, 471–479.
Kumar, S., 2006. Localized muscle fatigue: Review of three experiments. Revista Brasileira de Fisioterapia , 10, 9–28.
Lyons, M.F., Rouse, M.E., and Baxendale, R.H., 1993. Fatigue and EMG changes in the masseter and temporalis muscles
during sustained contractions. Journal of Oral Rehabilitation , 20, 321–331.
Mannion, A.F., Dumas, G.A., Cooper, R.G., Espinosa, F.J., Faris, M.W. and Stevenson, J.M., 1997. Muscle ﬁbre size and type
distribution in thoracic and lumbar regions of erector spinae in healthy subjects without low back pain: normal values and
sex diﬀerences. Journal of Anatomy , 190, 505–513.
Nag, P.K., Chintharia, S., Saiyed, S. and Nag, A., 1986. EMG analysis of sitting work postures in women. Applied Ergonomics,
17, 195–197.
Ng, J.K.F., Richardson, C.A., and Jull, G.A., 1997. Electromyographic amplitude and frequency changes in the iliocostalis
lumborum and multiﬁdus muscles during a trunk holding test. Physical Therapy , 77, 954–961.
Oﬃce of the National Culture Commission, 2009. Crossed sitting and heel sitting postures [online]. Available from: http://
www.culture.go.th/knowledge/action/sit.htm. [Accessed 13 March 2009].
Oﬃce of the National Economics and Social Development Board, 2009. Textile industry [online]. Available from: http://
www.nesdb.go.th/Portals/0/tasks/dev-ability/Proﬁle/industry [Accessed 4 June 2009].
O’Sullivan, P.B., Dankaerts, W., Burnett, A.F., Farrell, G.T., Jeﬀord, E., Naylor, C.S. and O’Sullivan, K.J., 2006. Eﬀect of
diﬀerent upright sitting postures on spinal-pelvic curvature and trunk muscle activation in a pain-free population. Spine, 31,
707–712.
702 P. Areeudomwong et al.
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012

===== PAGE 12 =====

Pope, M.H., Goh, K.L., and Magnusson, M.L., 2002. Spine ergonomics. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering , 4, 49–68.
Roy, S.H., De Luca, C.J., Emley, M., Oddsson, L.I., Buijs, R.J., Levins, J.A., Newcombe, D.S. and Jabre, J.F., 1997. Classiﬁcation
of back muscle impairment based on the surface electromyographic signal. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development,
34, 405–414.
Solomonow, M., Baratta, R.V., Banks, A., Freudenberger, C. and Zhou, B.H., 2003. Flexion-relaxation response to static
lumbar ﬂexion in males and females. Clinical Biomechanics , 18, 273–279.
Sparto, P.J., Parnianpour, M., Reinsel, T.E. and Simon, S., 1997. Spectral and temporal responses of trunk extensor
electromyography to an isometric endurance test. Spine, 22, 418–425.
Stulen, F.B. and De Luca, C.J., 1981. Frequency parameters of the myoelectric signal as a measure of muscle conduction
velocity. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , 28, 515–523.
Teeratrakul, B., Uthairat, R., Sangsri, S., Hanchaisri, K., Tanwattanasari, L. and Sangmanee, P., 2009. The Trends of Worker
Employment in 2010–2014 . [online]. Department of Employment. Available from: http://lmi.doe.go.th/LMI4/counter_
research/18.Labour%20Demand%20Projection%202010–2014.pdf [Accessed 17 November 2009].
Todd, A.I., Bennett, A.I., and Christie, C.J., 2007. Physical implications of prolonged sitting in a conﬁned posture-A literature
review. Ergonomics, 19, 7–21.
van Diee¨ n, J.H., Jansen, S.M.A., and Housheer, A.F., 1997. Diﬀerences in low back load between kneeling and seated working at
ground level. Applied Ergonomics , 28, 355–363.
van Diee¨ n, J.H., Oude Vrielink, H.H., Housheer, A.F., Lo ¨ tters, F.B. and Toussaint, H.M., 1993. Trunk extensor endurance and
its relationship to electromyogram parameters. European Journal of Applied Physiology , 66, 388–396.
Vergara, M. and Page, A., 2002. Relationship between comfort and back posture and mobility in sitting-posture. Applied
Ergonomics, 33, 1–8.
Wilder, D.G., Pope, M.H., and Frymoyer, J.W., 1988. The biomechanics of lumbar disc herniation and the eﬀect of overload and
instability. Journal of Spinal Disorders , 1, 16–32.
Yessierli and Nussbaum, M.A., 2007. Muscle fatigue during intermittent isokinetic shoulder abduction: age eﬀects and utility of
electromyographic measures. Ergonomics, 50, 1110–1126.
Ergonomics 703
Downloaded by [CDC Public Health Library & Information Center] at 07:20 26 September 2012