===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
0161-4754/99/$8.00 + 0 76/1/102744 © 1999 JMPT
594
INTRODUCTION
Because of a void in the literature, an automotive engi-
neering corporation requested that the authors determine an
optimal sitting spinal model of a driver and an optimal dri-
ver’s seat. To complete these two objectives, the state of the
current knowledge concerning chair design and sitting
ergonomics in the work place (office and factory) and in
automobiles was reviewed. Part I of this review concentrates
on sitting in the work place. Sitting dynamics (vibration) and
sitting of drivers will be discussed in part II.
Because few studies exist for sitting in the driver’s seat of an
automobile compared with sitting in the work place, the pur-
pose of part I is to review sitting ergonomic principles that will
be applied to automobile seats presented in part II. Key words
used in MEDLINE searches were sitting ergonomics, sitting
posture, spine model, seat design, sitting lordosis, sitting elec-
tromyography, vibration, and sitting and biomechanics.
Discussion
The concepts of ideal sitting posture have a long history in
the literature, especially in the German literature. In 1884,
Staffel
1 wrote the standard for the sitting position that was
quoted later by Fick, 2 Strasser, 3 and Schede. 4 By 1929,
Drescher5 had already designed seats for Siemens factories
that had adjustable backrests and seat bottoms with rounded
front edges to reduce pressure on the under-thigh region. In
1948, Akerbloom
6 provided a review of sitting principles
from the period 1853-1947.
Keegan, in 19537 and again in 1962,8 wrote a comprehen-
sive evaluation of seats and sitting while discussing degener-
ation and herniation of lower lumbar discs. He
7 obtained lat-
eral radiographs of the lumbar spine of his subjects in a
variety of positions, including standing, squatting, bending,
and sitting in different chairs. In 1966, Knutsson et al
9 had
an interesting review in the ﬁrst part of their article on elec-
tromyographic evaluation of the sacrospinal muscles during
sitting. In 1971, Kroemer
10 reviewed the footrests, office
equipment, consoles, work benches, and machine stands in
factories and ofﬁce settings.
Seated posture has also been of interest in Sweden. In
1970, Nachemson and Elfstrom
11 inserted pressure sensors
into the discs of live subjects (4 subjects) and showed that
sitting posture caused a higher disc pressure than standing or
lying. Andersson et al
12-16 wrote a series of articles on elec-
aChiropractic BioPhysics Nonproﬁt, Inc, Harvest, Ala.
bSpine Research Institute of San Diego, Calif.
cPrivate practice of chiropractic, Elko, Nev.
dPrivate practice of chiropractic, Normal, Ill. 
Submit reprint requests to: Donald D. Harrison, PhD, DC, Presi-
dent, CBP Nonproﬁt, Inc, 210 Bent Oak Circle, Harvest, AL 35749.
Paper submitted December 9, 1998; in revised form February 12,
1999.
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Sitting Biomechanics Part I: Review of the Literature
Donald D. Harrison, DC, PhD,a Sanghak O. Harrison, DC,a Arthur C. Croft, DC,b Deed E.
Harrison, DC,c and Stephan J. Troyanovich, DCd
ABSTRACT
Objective: To develop a new sitting spinal
model and an optimal driver’s seat by using
review of the literature of seated positions of
the head, spine, pelvis, and lower extremities.
Data Selection: Searches included MED-
LINE for scientific journals, engineering
standards, and textbooks. Key terms included
sitting ergonomics, sitting posture, spine model,
seat design, sitting lordosis, sitting electromyogra-
phy, seated vibration, and sitting and biomechanics.
Data Synthesis: In part I, papers were selected if (1) they con-
tained a first occurrence of a sitting topic, (2) were reviews of
the literature, (3) corrected errors in previous studies, or (4) had
improved study designs compared with previous papers. In part
II, we separated information pertaining to sitting dynamics and
drivers of automobiles from part I.
Results: Sitting causes the pelvis to rotate backward and caus-
es reduction in lumbar lordosis, trunk-thigh angle, and knee
angle and an increase in muscle effort and disc pressure. Seated
posture is affected by seat-back angle, seat-bottom angle and
foam density, height above floor, and presence
of armrests.
Conclusion: The configuration of the spine,
postural position, and weight transfer is dif-
ferent in the 3 types of sitting: anterior, mid-
dle, and posterior. Lumbar lordosis is affect-
ed by the trunk-thigh angle and the knee
angle. Subjects in seats with backrest inclina-
tions of 110 to 130 degrees, with concomitant
lumbar support, have the lowest disc pressures
and lowest electromyography recordings from
spinal muscles. A seat-bottom posterior inclination of 5
degrees and armrests can further reduce lumbar disc pressures
and electromyography readings while seated. To reduce forward
translated head postures, a seat-back inclination of 110 degrees
is preferable over higher inclinations. Work objects, such as
video monitors, are optimum at eye level. Forward-tilting, seat-
bottom inclines can increase lordosis, but subjects give high
comfort ratings to adjustable chairs, which allow changes in
position. (J Manipulative Physiol Ther 1999;22:594-609)
Key Indexing Terms: Sitting; Biomechanics; Lordosis; Ergo-
nomics; Spine; Model; Vibration; Posture; Chair Design

===== PAGE 2 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
595
tromyographic measurements and disc pressure during seat-
ed postures, including office chairs, wheel chairs, and dri-
ver’s seats.
In 1980, the Society of Automobile Engineers
17 wrote a
manual covering all aspects of car seats, both front and rear.
Williams et al
18 presented a more recent review of sitting
and pain and reported that lordosis is preferred over kypho-
sis. In a review done especially for automobile seats,
Fubini
19 wrote a synopsis of safety, comfort, adaptability,
practicality, solidity, and suitability.
In the late 1800s and early 1900s, several design items
were identified. Very early, Parow 20 and von Meyer 21 con-
cluded that the ischial tuberosities were the chief points of
support in the sitting position because of posterior pelvic
rotation. V on Meyer
21,22 stated that spinal ligaments were
not in tension while sitting and that a support is required to
give lumbar relaxation. He noted that straight-back chairs
did not give support to the spinal column. In 1884, Staffel’s
designed chair
1 had a lumbar support and a space under this
support for the buttocks to slide backward to effect some
forward rotation of the pelvis.
The debate about what constitutes a normal position of
the lumbar spine during sitting (kyphosis or lordosis)
occurred as early as 1911. Fick
2 thought that the spine
should be “ventriﬂexed,” whereas Staffel1 suggested that the
lumbar curve in sitting should be as close as possible to its
form in the standing position.
Some of the issues (or variables) studied before 1950
included the following: (1) seat-bottom height, (2) seat-bot-
tom incline, (3) seat-bottom contour, (4) seat-bottom width,
(5) seat-bottom length, (6) seat-back tilt inclination, (7) seat-
back lumbar support, (8) seat-back height, (9) table and desk
height, (10) the correct sitting posture, (11) muscle activity
while seated, (12) thigh angle to trunk, (13) knee angle, and
(14) footrest position.
Fig 1 illustrates some of these ideas, which Keegan
8 sug-
gested for seat design, and these are numbered from most
important to least important.
Before Snijders et al,
23 Fick2 and von Meyer22 discussed
sitting with crossed legs. Before Marumoto et al, 24 Spitzy25
and Schede 4 discussed table height and near sightedness
while sitting. Before Lord et al26 and Keegan,8 von Meyer22
and Staffel1 had written about loss of lumbar lordosis from
standing to sitting. Before Coleman et al 27 and Keegan, 8
Staffel1 had incorporated lumbar supports on his designed
chairs. Before Hooton 28 and Floyd and Roberts, 29 Staffel1
discussed table heights for adults and children while sitting.
Before Reinecke et al
30 presented lumbar support motion as
a “new” strategy, Hertzberg31 had designed a pulsating seat
cushion and lumbar support for the US Air Force.
Let us next examine normal standing posture. Because
humans are the only species on earth with an upright stance,
all dynamics (after rising from a lying position) are changes
from an upright posture. Thus such movements as walking,
squatting, climbing, and sitting can be described as changes
from the upright position. Therefore normal upright posture
must be deﬁned before sitting changes are described.
Normal Standing Procedure
The details of sitting posture require more than just a def-
inition of upright human posture. Although posture align-
ment is of vital importance, posture provides few details of
the inside spinal alignment. Because the positions of indi-
vidual vertebrae are desired for a sitting spinal model, a nor-
mal upright spinal model is required to discuss spinal
changes occurring in the sitting posture. Thus after dis-
cussing normal upright posture, a normal spinal model will
be reviewed.
Postural control is a fundamental but complex motor
function, which is involved in nearly every motor task.
Different theories have been developed to explain the neural
organization required for sitting, standing, breathing, and
movement.
32 Electromyographic studies have been per-
formed on infants to follow the evolution of sitting to stand-
ing posture.
33
All authors of postural studies represent the anteroposteri-
or view of upright stance as a true vertical alignment of cen-
ters of mass (Fig 2, A). However, in the lateral view, there is
debate about which anatomic structures are aligned to a ver-
tical gravity line (Fig 2, B-D). Normal standing posture has
been defined as perfect alignment of the ear, shoulder, hip,
knee, and ankle (Fig 2, B).
34 In 1985, Woodhull et al35 stated
that good standing posture is often idealized36 and that stud-
ies37-41 reporting the average standing posture indicate that
the body center of gravity lies slightly anterior to the talus of
the ankle (Fig 2, C). For different ideal posture, Kapandji
42
stated that the posterior parts of the head, back, and buttocks
Fig 1. Keegan’s7 1953 list of important aspects of seat design: 1,
lumbar support; 2, minimum 105-degree tilt angle of backrest; 3,
open space for posteriorly projecting sacrum and buttocks; 4, con-
vex thoracic support with height to lower scapulae; 5, shoulder
support at 105 degrees; 6, any adjustable tilt of seat back pivoted
on a point in line with the hip joints; 7, maximum length of seat bot-
tom (16 in); 8, seat-bottom height above floor (16 in); 9, seat bot-
tom curved down under back of knees; 10, free space for feet under
seat bottom; and 11, upward tilt of seat bottom of 5 degrees for
maintenance of back against back support.

===== PAGE 3 =====

should be vertically aligned (Fig 2, D). Thus, as in spinal
modeling, there is debate concerning the use of an ideal nor-
mal position versus an average normal position.
The validity of restoring normal posture as a clinical out-
come
43,44 and reliability of measuring posture has been
established. 45-47 Even though ideal posture has been
described in the literature for more than a hundred years, the
alignment of the vertebrae in the lateral view cannot be
determined from posture.
48-50
Average spinal alignment in the sagittal view has been
determined from numerous radiographic studies. Spinal
modeling, although determining some guidelines of align-
ment during impact simulations, has often used the align-
ment determined from one human subject instead of using
equilibrium equations or an average from a large population
of subjects. To develop normal alignment of the cervical lor-
dosis, thoracic kyphosis, lumbar lordosis, and pelvic tilt,
spinal modeling and lateral radiographic studies will be
reviewed.
Spinal Modeling and Spinal Alignment
Spinal modeling began in the 1950s to explain spinal
injuries to ejected Air Force pilots. 51 In 1984, King 52
reviewed the use of biomechanical models for studying
musculoskeletal biomechanics. In 1987, Yoganandan et al
53
reviewed the types of spinal models in the biomechanics lit-
erature, including the following: (1) anthropometric, (2) dis-
crete parameter, (3) continuous elastic, and (4) finite ele-
ment (FEM). After the description of locations of centers of
mass for various body parts by Clauser et al,
54 Belytschiko
and Privitzer 55 published a complete 3-dimensional spinal
model with in vivo and in vitro validation. Theirs was a seat-
ed model with posterior pelvic rotation to simulate the
forces on pilots who were subjected to seat pyrotechnic
ejections. Fig 3 illustrates this model. They concluded that
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
596
Fig 3. Belytschko and Privitzer’s55 sitting spinal model developed
for the Air Force. Note that the pelvis is rotated posteriorly, but the
head and rib cage remain in the alignment found in the ideal stand-
ing position.
Fig 2. Standing postural alignment. The anteroposterior view depicts the vertical align-
ment of the body centers of mass and vertebrae in A. The literature agrees on this
anteroposterior view alignment. There is disagreement among the idealized alignments
in the lateral view (B and D) and the averages of measured human alignment in the lat-
eral view (C). Compared with the ideal posture (B), the average posture (C) has anteri-
or head translation and anterior pelvic translation.
A
A B
B C D

===== PAGE 4 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
597
the spinal alignment must be a true vertical in the anteropos-
terior view, have lordotic cervical and lumbar curvatures in
the lateral view, and be without any anterior head translation
or posterior thoracic translation.
Another early spinal model was described by Schultz and
Galante.
56 For the anteroposterior spinal alignment, Schultz
and Miller 57,58 stated that “the spine is approximately
straight when viewed frontally because each vertebra and
disc is approximately symmetric about the sagittal plane.” In
1991, Schultz
59 stated that “one advantage of using a mathe-
matical rather than a physical model is that changes are easy
to make in a mathematical model.” In the lateral view for the
cervical spine, such changes could be the inclusion of spe-
cific angles for average cervical lordosis. For example, a
mean of 23 degrees was reported for Ruth Jackson’s stress
lines on C2 compared with C7.
60 Ruth Jackson’s stress lines
are examples of posterior tangents at C2 and C7. The angle
formed by these tangents at C2 and C7 is termed an absolute
rotation angle (ARA).
In 1996, Yoganandan et al
61 reviewed the use of FEM
models of the cervical spine. They state that “the finite ele-
ment method is an invaluable application tool that can sup-
plement experimental research in understanding the clinical
biomechanics of the spine.” An FEM can be described as
dividing an object of interest into small geometric shapes
(eg, tetrahedrons), thereby creating a 3-dimensional mesh.
Each of these geometric shapes (elements) can be assigned
appropriate mechanical (material) properties, which have
been established from experiments. These models can then
be subjected to nearly limitless experimental conditions by
means of software interface and can closely approximate
stresses, strains, deflections, bending moments, and shears.
For example, at the Iowa Spine Institute, Goel et al
62,63 now
have a complete spine FEM with pelvis and ribs.
In 1996, while presenting a simple geometric cervical
spine model as a normal standard and as an initial starting
position, Harrison et al
64 noted that “considering all these
models, a rigorously defined normal, static position is
encountered rarely.” Using the posterior tangent line analy-
sis at C2 and C7, Harrison et al
64-67 presented validation of a
circular sagittal cervical model with an average ARA of 34
degrees and an ideal ARA of 42 degrees. They also present-
ed average relative rotation values for each pair of cervical
vertebrae from a large population of 400 subjects.
64 For the
thoracic kyphosis, nearly identical means were reported for
all the segmental angles (relative rotation angles [RRAs]),
and an overall thoracic kyphosis mean value was reported as
an ARA of 40 degrees from T1 to T12.
68,69
For the lumbar lordosis in a 1997 study, Troyanovich et
al70 compared results from 7 separate standing lateral lum-
bar studies (n = 552). They found that a fundamental lumbar
lordosis existed across a large range of age groups. Average
segmental RRAs, ARAs, Cobb angles, Ferguson angles,
arcuate angles, and Z-axis translations for T12 to S1 were
determined for the lumbar spine.
70 While refining the
Harrison spinal model, the sagittal lumbar lordosis was suc-
cessfully modeled with an 85-degree portion of an ellipse
with an L1 to L5 ARA of 40 degrees and a T12 to S1 Cobb
angle of 65 degrees.
71,72
The Harrison spinal model provides qualitative normals
(geometric shapes are cervical circular arc, thoracic circular
arc, and lumbar elliptical arc) and tables of quantitative nor-
mal sets of values for the cervical lordosis and lumbar lordo-
sis.
73 With these normals, diagnosis of spinal displacement
on radiographs is possible. Fig 4 illustrates this Harrison
geometric model with end-of-curve measurements on the
base of the posterior tangent radiographic method at C2 to
C7, T3 to T10, and L1 to L5.
The elliptical shape of the lumbar lordosis might lead one
to design an elliptical-shaped lumbar support. However,
Mosner et al
74 failed to find any significant differences in
lordotic radiographic appearance between black and white
persons, even though there are entirely different lateral low
back skin contours present during physical examination.
With normal qualitative and quantitative values for standing
posture, we are now able to describe what happens to a
human in the seated posture, which are described as changes
from standing.
Biomechanics of Seated Postures
Previously, a list of design aspects affecting seated pos-
ture was given. These items affect seated posture in different
ways. Before determining how a sitting human’s posture
will be changed, it is convenient to categorize seated posture
by location of the center of gravity.
Fig 4. Harrison geometric model with circular arcs for the cervical
and thoracic curvatures and an elliptic arc for the lumbar spine.
Normal average and normal ideal values for these angles can be
found in Harrison et al.
73

===== PAGE 5 =====

In 1962, Schoberth 75 defined 3 different sitting postures
on the basis of the location of the center of gravity of the
body and the proportion of body weight transmitted to the
floor by the feet. Schoberth termed these 3 sitting postures
as anterior, middle, and posterior. He noted that these 3 pos-
tures also differed with respect to the shape of the lumbar
spine. He showed radiographically that his subjects posteri-
orly rotated their pelvises 40 degrees on average during tran-
sition of standing to sitting.
In the middle position (Fig 5, C), the center of gravity is
above the ischial tuberosities, and the feet transmit about
25% of the body weight to the floor. In sitting in a relaxed
middle position, the lumbar spine is either straight or in
slight kyphosis. The anterior position can be obtained from
the middle position either by a forward rotation of the pelvis
(Fig 5, B) or by creating a kyphosis of the spine by flexing
without much rotation of the pelvis (Fig 5, A). In this anteri-
or position the center of gravity is in front of the ischial
tuberosities, and the feet transmit more than 25% of the
body weight to the ﬂoor. In the posterior position (Fig 5, D)
the center of gravity is above or behind the ischial tuberosi-
ties, and less than 25% of the body weight is transmitted by
the feet. This position is obtained by extension rotation of
the pelvis and simultaneous kyphosis of the spine.
Before Schoberth’s
75 sitting categories were published,
Keegan7 radiographed a small number of subjects (only 4) in
various standing and sitting postures to determine changes
in the lumbar spine in the lateral view. He traced the posteri-
or vertebral bodies on each radiograph and then superim-
posed the sacrums of all tracings to create a composite tem-
plate. Fig 6, A-P, shows the positions radiographed and
resulting variations in the lumbar spine. Note that Fig 6, F,
G, L, and N, are types of posterior sitting; Figs 6,I, J, and M,
are examples of middle sitting; and Fig 6, O, is a type of
anterior sitting.
From other lateral tracings, Keegan derived a relationship
between lordosis and thigh-trunk angle. He radiographed his
subjects in the lateral recumbent position while varying only
the thigh-trunk angle. Fig 7 shows that as the thigh-trunk
angle is reduced from 200 to 50 degrees, the pelvis rotates
posteriorly, and the lumbar lordosis becomes kyphotic.
Keegan discovered that the length (he hypothesized tension)
in the anterior and posterior thigh muscles accounted for the
effects of thigh-trunk flexion and extension. In Fig 7 the
anterior and posterior thigh muscles are darkened to show
their attachments. Fig 7 also shows how tension in these
muscles will pull on the pelvis. He determined that the 135-
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
598
Fig 5. Schoberth’s three sitting categories on the basis of center of gravity location. The vector
RS represents the reaction force through the seat bottom. RF is the reaction force from the
ground at the feet. CG, Center of gravity of the body mass above the pelvis.
A B C D
Fig 6. In 1953, Keegan radiographed subjects in different sitting,
standing, and lying postures. Reprinted with permission: Keegan JJ.
Alterations of the lumbar curve related to posture and seating. Re-
printed with permission from J Bone Joint Surg1953;35-A:589-603.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
599
degree thigh-trunk angle was a neutral position for tension
in the thigh muscles. He believed that tension in the anterior
thigh muscles (and psoas) in standing accentuated the lum-
bar curve. He thought that, beside the lever arm for posterior
pelvic rotation caused by sitting on the ischial tuberosities,
the tension in the posterior thigh muscles played a large role
in posterior rotation of the pelvis and reduction of the lum-
bar lordosis.
In a recent study with 109 subjects, Lord et al
76 measured
the changes in lumbar lordosis between standing and sitting
posture. The sitting posture was upright middle posture with
90-degree thigh-trunk angle and 90-degree knee angle; the
feet were made to rest on the ﬂoor by adjusting the height of
the seat. By using a Cobb angle from the top of L1 to the top
of S1, the mean standing lordosis of 49 degrees was reduced
to 34 degrees in the seated posture.
In another recent study, Yasukouchi and Isayama
77 mea-
sured lumbar lordosis and pelvic rotation of 20 male sub-
jects in standing and 3 different middle sitting postures. The
3 sitting postures were based on thigh-trunk angles of 120,
90, and 60 degrees, which were obtained by changing the
height of the seat bottom above the ﬂoor. To obtain the 120-
degree thigh-trunk angle, they also had to incline the seat
bottom forward. Additionally, they varied the knee angle at
60, 90, and 120 degrees in the two thigh-trunk postures of 60
and 90 degrees. Instead of radiographs, an inclinometer was
used for lumbar lordosis. Taped skin markers were used on
the armpits, iliocristale, trochanter major, and lateral epi-
condyle for thigh-trunk angle. Also, instead of radiographs
for pelvic tilt, skin markers on the trochanter major and
iliocristale were photographed and compared with a vertical
line. They concluded that pelvic tilt was caused by different
hip extensors to an extent dependent on changing the thigh-
trunk and knee angles. Because skin markers are somewhat
inaccurate because of elasticity of the stretching skin, their
results may be less valid than radiographic studies. How-
ever, several investigators
77-79 have reported that lumbar lor-
dosis was affected by the knee ﬂexion angle.
In another recent study without radiographic measure-
ments, Black et al80 used a Metrecom, a 3-dimensional com-
puterized digitizer, to mark the palpated points of the (1)
anterior nasal spine, (2) mastoid process, (3) spinous
process of T1, (4) palpation-derived body of T4, (5)
suprasternal notch, (6) spinous process of L1, (7) spinous
process of S2, and (8) anterior-superior iliac spine. They
studied 3 different sitting postures: (1) middle sitting
slumped, (2) middle sitting erect, and (3) anterior sitting
with only pelvic rotation. Although trying to separate upper
and lower cervical spine movements, they modeled the cer-
vical spine as 3 rigid bodies: head, neck, and base of the cer-
vical spine. The degree of lumbar lordosis was assessed by
using a Cybex 320 electronic digital inclinometer. They
used intraclass coefﬁcients with repeated measures to show
their method was repeatable; all intraclass coefﬁcients were
greater than 0.65 except head inclination, which was 0.48.
Because of elasticity of the stretching skin and the use of
palpation, their results are not as valid as those obtained in
radiographic studies, but they claimed that flexion in the
lumbar spine was accompanied by extension in the cervical
spine, while the head orientation remained fairly constant.
Effects of Seat Design
Bendix and Biering-Sorensen81 studied the effects of seat-
bottom inclination on 10 subjects. They studied 4 positions
of the seat bottom: (1) level, (2) 5-degree forward inclina-
tion, (3) 10-degree forward inclination, and (4) 15-degree
forward inclination. They used an inclinometer to measure
the distances between 4 points marked with a Speed marker:
(1) a sacral point near the spinous process of S2, (2) a lum-
bar point near the L1 spinous process, (3) a thoracic point
near the spinous process of T4, and (4) the external occipital
protuberance. The height of the chair was adjusted to keep
the subjects’ thighs horizontal and lower legs vertical. They
observed their subjects for 1 hour of sitting in “a comfort-
able position with elbows placed on the table,” which was
provided. They noted an increase in lumbar lordosis with a
forward increase in seat incline, and they hypothesized 3
possible ways of adapting the body to a forward-tilting seat
bottom. Fig 8 illustrates these positions. Because their sub-
jects’ lumbar angles showed a 4-degree increase, these
authors suggested that the position in Fig 8, B, occurred.
Subjects rated the 0- and 5-degree inclines as most comfort-
able after 1 hour of sitting while reading. This study and
other studies examining longer sitting periods confirm fre-
quent leg crossing in seated subjects.
81-83
The incline or slope of seat bottoms has been a subject of
debate for more than 100 years. In 1884, Staffel 1 recom-
mended a forward slope. Other proﬁles, such as level and
backward slopes, have been suggested.
84-86 In Akerbloom’s
classic text,6 he suggested 3 to 5 degrees of backward incline,
which was actually proposed by Schulthess 87 in 1905. By
Fig 7. Effects of altering the thigh-trunk angle in the lateral recum-
bent posture. Reprinted with permission: Keegan JJ. Alterations of
the lumbar curve related to posture and seating. Reprinted with
permission from J Bone Joint Surg 1953;35-A:589-603.

===== PAGE 7 =====

1958, Floyd and Roberts29 suggested that the slope of the seat
bottom should be changed to ﬁt the job requirements. The
horizontal seat allows freedom of movement, while the back-
ward slope tends to move the subject against the backrest and
lumbar support.
In 1953, Keegan
7 noted that seat-bottom height, when too
high above the ﬂoor, could cause shorter people to have dan-
gling legs. This position causes compression stresses on the
soft tissues of the posterior thigh and becomes uncomfort-
able in a short period of time. Thus a short person sitting on
a chair that is too high for him or her will soon sit on the
edge of the chair and negate any seat-bottom incline or any
lumbar support.
This situation can occur when the seat-bottom length is
too long (seat depth).
29,84,88 The shorter person will not slide
back against the backrest because of pressure at the posteri-
or knee area. The minimum width is from trochanter to
trochanter to allow support for the ischial tuberosities.
29,89
The maximum width would be to accommodate overweight
subjects. The range of seat width and length in most refer-
ences were between 35 and 40 cm for both dimensions.
90
Seat-bottom contour has also been discussed in the litera-
ture. Various contour shapes have been proposed, including
saddle-shape, molded to ﬁt the buttocks, and sloping valley
posteriorly. Attempts to conform the seat to the thighs have
proved unsuccessful, and a flat surface has been suggested
as optimal.
84 The pressure zones on flat seats were deter-
mined by viewing a naked person sitting on a glass plane or
by using powder on a naked person to check for sitting
impression.
91 Others92-94 have studied the pressures under
the ischial tuberosities and thighs in sitting. Brienza et al 94
presented their seating system structure, which has a support
surface of vertical elements arranged in an 11 × 12 array.
These elements depress linearly by the amount of pressure
applied, thus forming a pressure distribution with measured
values.
In 1962, Swearingen et al
95 studied the supporting struc-
tures for 104 subjects. The body weight is supported by 8%
of the seat area under the ischia, which carries 64.8% of the
weight. They observed that the remaining 35.2% is borne by
the combination of footrests (18.4%), armrests (12.4%), and
a backrest (4.4%) at 105 degrees. They believed that the
small amount of weight carried by the backrest indicated
that stability was achieved here, although not necessarily
relaxation of the muscles.
The classic texts and review article by Akerbloom,
6
Keegan,7,8 and Kroemer90 presented reviews of the topic of
seat-back design. Table 1 4,85,87,90,96 summarizes the recom-
mended setback inclinations from 90 to 125 degrees. Seat-
back height ranged from the inferior of the shoulder blades
to the top of the shoulders. In Keegan’s 1962 text,
8 he pre-
sented a rating system for evaluating 36 seats ranging from
church benches to car and truck seats. He stated that manu-
facturers were ignoring ergonomic research on seat designs,
and that seat-back incline research and lumbar support
research were not being applied for the public comfort.
Kroemer
90 also discussed use of a lumbar support pad.
Most references recommended a lumbar support in the
range (3-5 cm) suggested by Akerbloom in 1948.
6 Majeske
and Buchanan 97 investigated changes in the angular posi-
tions of the forearm, upper arm, pelvis, trunk, neck, and
head in middle relaxed sitting with and without a lumbar
support. Photographs of data markers placed on the sub-
jects’ skin were measured with a protractor. They claimed
the various joint angles were more normal in sitting with a
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
600
Table 1. Summary of seat-back inclination before 1972
Author Year Suggested seat-back angle
Schulthess87 1905 100-105 degrees
Schede4 1935 Individual minimum*
Lay and Fisher85 1940 111-117 degrees
Morant96 1947 110 degrees for alert pilots, 110-125 
degrees for rest position
Kroemer90 1971 90-120 degree range in review article
*When subject began to rest against the back support.
Fig 8. Hypothesized 3 possible ways to sit on inclined seats. Bendix
and Biering-Sorensen81 determined that position A could not occur
from their data and that position B was how their subjects adapted
to forward-inclining seat bottoms.

===== PAGE 8 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
601
lumbar support. They also noted a reduction in anterior head
carriage with a lumbar support. In 1991, Williams et al 18
studied 210 subjects with pain while sitting randomly
assigned to kyphotic sitting or sitting with a lumbar support.
When sitting with a lumbar support, their subjects reported
signiﬁcantly reduced low back pain and reduced referred leg
pain. An increase in pain for kyphotic sitting subjects was
found.
In 1971, Kroemer
90 also suggested armrests depending on
the ergonomic requirements of the sitter. If free mobility of
the trunk, shoulders, and arms was required, then armrests
might be a hindrance. Otherwise, adjustable armrests are
helpful in changing positions and for decreasing the load on
the spinal column.
Before 1970, head restraints are not discussed. Especially
in automobile impact research, head restraints were
designed to reduce extension strains during whiplash.
Recently, posterior head translation strains were considered
a major factor in whiplash.
98
The reader may have noticed that we have presented a his-
tory of seat design up to about 1970, with only a few refer-
ences that are recent, and thus we have not yet presented the
advancements in the past 30 years. In the later 1960s and
early 1970s, a shift in research methods took place. Before
1970, most sitting “research” was (1) theoretical and based
on the mechanical ideas of the particular authors, (2) based
on the comments of comfort of the subjects, (3) based on the
observed reactions of the subjects studied, (4) based on
anthropometric averages of populations,
99 and/or (5) based
on radiographic studies. Around 1970, 3 types of methods
began to help the researcher sift through the multitude of
personal opinions about sitting.
In the later 1960s, ergonomists began to develop comfort
rating methods, which were made better with reliability and
validity studies. In the 1960s, electromyographic studies of
muscle activity in different postures began to appear. In 1970,
Nachemson and Elfstrom
11 published their famous study on
internal pressures in the intervertebral disc in various sitting
and standing postures. They inserted needle electrodes into
the lumbar discs (usually L3-L4) of live subjects. Many peo-
ple believe that Nachemson and Elfstrom only studied disc
pressure in lying, standing, and sitting, and that sitting caused
the greatest disc pressure. However, they studied 17 body po-
sitions, including some in lifting weights. Fig 9 is from their
study and illustrates loads on the discs in various positions.
In the cervical and lumbar areas, the annulus of the disc is
wedge shaped, being thicker and higher anteriorly than pos-
teriorly.
100-102 Measurements of disc pressure in vivo and in
vitro have established lordosis in the cervical and lumbar
areas as the normal configuration.
103,104 On the basis of in
vitro studies, the pressure in the nucleus has been deter-
mined to be approximately 50% higher than that found dur-
ing any externally applied vertical load when two adjacent
vertebral bodies are parallel and much less than that found
when in the normal, slightly extended position.
11,103,104 Any
shift in load from vertical creates a concomitant myoelectric
activity, which increases the load on the disc.
11 When stand-
ing erect, the normal vertebral column is straight in the
anteroposterior aspect and curved in the lateral aspect; there
is a cervical lordosis, a thoracic kyphosis, and a lumbar lor-
dosis.
12 Thus some additional scientiﬁc information became
available for later studies (1970-1998) to determine optimal
seat designs and optimal seated positions for different
ergonomic requirements.
Optimal Seated Posture
Akerbloom6 used electromyography to demonstrate that
the support of the lumbar spine in seated posture is sufﬁcient
to rest the back muscles. In other early studies with elec-
tromyography in sitting, Lundervold studied typists in
1951
105 and 1958.106
In 1954, Basmajian and Bentzon,107 and in 1958, Basma-
jian108 studied muscles of the thigh, leg, foot, and the ilio-
psoas during standing posture. In 1955, Floyd and Silver 109
studied the myoelectric patterns of the erector spinae in stand-
ing posture. In a series of myoelectric studies in standing,
Joseph and Nightingale,
110-112 Joseph et al,113 and Joseph and
Williams114 investigated hip, thigh, and leg muscles.
In 1961, Carlsoo 115 examined muscles of the lower leg,
thigh, hip, abdominal region, and neck in the standing posture
with electromyography and then compared these readings
with a multitude of abnormal postures and working positions.
One of the earliest studies of sitting posture with elec-
tromyography to determine an optimal seat-back incline and
size of lumbar support pad was by Knutsson et al
9 in 1966.
They studied 4 groups of subjects: normal subjects (n = 20),
subjects with back pain without radiographic findings (n =
10), subjects with back pain with minor radiographic
changes (n = 10), and subjects with back pain with severe
Fig 9. Results of Nachemson and Elfstrom’s 1970 study. 11 Mean
change in load (%) compared with standing values.

===== PAGE 9 =====

and muscle activity, Andersson et al12-15 studied sitting in an
experimental chair, sitting at a work table, sitting in a wheel-
chair, and sitting in an automobile seat. The 4 parameters
studied were backrest inclination, seat-bottom inclination,
lumbar support (height and amount of horizontal travel), and
(upper) thoracic support. Andersson et al studied standing, 7
unsupported sitting positions, and supported sitting pos-
tures. They found that internal disc pressure was consider-
ably higher in unsupported sitting than in standing. Increase
in backrest inclination and increase in lumbar support was
associated with a decrease in disc pressure in supported sit-
ting. Myoelectrical activity was approximately the same for
standing and relaxed unsupported sitting. For electromyo-
graphic readings, the highest level of activity occurred in
anterior sitting, and the lowest occurred in posterior sitting.
To obtain low values of both electromyographic readings
and disc pressure, the authors stated that the backrest should
be inclined to at least 100 degrees. Fig 10 shows disc pres-
sure in the standing position and in their 7 unsupported sit-
ting positions. Fig 11 shows their results of decreasing myo-
electric activity with backrest inclination, whereas Figs 12
and 13 show decreasing disc pressure with seat-back incli-
nation and the effects of support (lumbar support, thoracic
support, and seat-bottom backward incline), respectively.
In 1974, Andersson et al
14 studied the effect of armrests
on disc pressure and myoelectric activity. They found that
the use of armrests further reduced the disc pressure and the
myoelectric activity in the trapezius muscles. If armrests are
too high, the subject must elevate the shoulders and abduct
the arms.
116 If the armrests are too low, the subject must
slide the buttocks forward or lean forward to use them. If the
armrests are too far laterally, increased abduction of the
arms and increased inward rotation of the humerus occurs.
Fig 14 illustrates lower disc pressure, with changes in seat-
back inclination, when using armrests compared with arms
hanging.
radiographic findings of disc degeneration and spondylosis
(n = 10). They studied middle sitting with two seat-back
inclines of 100 and 110 degrees while varying the lumbar
support pad at 0, 1, 2, and 3 cm. Patients sat against the seat
back with knees at a 90-degree angle and hands resting on
thighs. The electromyography readings favored a 110-
degree seat-back incline and 1 to 2 cm of lumbar support,
except for the severely degenerated patients who favored the
100-degree incline and 1 to 2 cm of support.
Many of the later studies of electromyography in sitting
combined disc internal pressure and muscle activity. In a
series of articles in 1974 combining disc internal pressure
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
602
Fig 12. Average values of normalized disc pressure (at 0.51 mPa)
reduces with seat back incline and increasing horizontal lumbar
support.
Fig 10. Andersson et al’s 1974 disc-pressure ﬁndings in unsupport-
ed sitting.12-15
Fig 11. Myoelectric amplitude reduces with increase in seat-back
incline.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
603
Lumbar Lordosis versus Kyhosis in Seated Posture
The vast majority of authors have favored a lordotic lum-
bar spine, whereas a few117-119 have advocated a ﬂexed pos-
ture when sitting. The electromyographic studies and disc
pressure studies just reviewed proved that flexion of the
lumbar spine while seated caused an increase in load on the
muscles and discs, whereas a lordotic posture greatly
reduced these pressures. Still, in 1983, the flexed position
while seated was promoted by Adams and Hutton.
117
Adams and Hutton 117 loaded cadaveric lumbar motion
segments for 4 hours, with some segments in flexion and
some in extension. Flexed discs lost more ﬂuid, especially in
the nucleus pulposus. They concluded that fluid flow in
flexed postures can aid the nutrition of the lumbar discs.
Adams and Hutton seemed to discount the fact that it might
be disadvantageous to lose fluid rapidly from the disc in a
prolonged ﬂexed posture.
In 1988, Dolan et al
118 studied 11 subjects in different
postures, including standing and sitting, with surface elec-
tromyography. They measured the lumbar lordosis with
electronic inclinometers. Their results confirmed data from
previous studies that all sitting postures reduced the lumbar
lordosis and increased electromyographic readings. They
also noted that compressive forces on the apophyseal joints
are reduced in flexed postures. They claimed that “people
want to reduce the lumbar lordosis whenever possible, even
at the expense of increasing back muscle activity.” They
appear to be inﬂuenced by a 1965 study on primitive peoples
by Fahrni and Trueman.
119
In 1965, Fahrni and Trueman 119 claimed that the inci-
dence of lumbar disc disease was very low in people who
habitually sit or squat in positions that greatly ﬂex the lum-
bar spine. Although Fahrni and Trueman promoted squatting
with feet flat on the ground, Keegan (Fig 6, H) had shown
that squatting on the toes was associated with very good lor-
dosis compared with most sitting positions. Fahrni and
Trueman also neglected the idea that primitive peoples are
generally more active, not overweight, in better physical
condition, nonsmokers, and do not sit for prolonged periods
as do modern people.
Finally, in the 1990s, Adams and colleagues began to re-
verse their minority-held opinion about sitting ﬂexed pos-
tures being desirable in their published works in 1995
120 and
1996.121 In a 1995 review of lumbar spine mechanics, they
stated that the only known loading condition to cause poste-
rior disc prolapse involved prolonged forward bending (ﬂex-
ion) with compression and lateral bending. In 1996, they
noted in their review of the literature that the ability of the
disc to act as a hydrostatic cushion depends on the high wa-
ter content of these tissues, especially the nucleus pulposus.
The discerning reader realized that Adams and Hutton’s
1983 study
117 had shown high water content loss in ﬂexed
postures and that they 121 may be about to reverse their mi-
nority position on ﬂexion. They also noted that stress con-
centrations in the posterior annulus caused by prolonged
ﬂexion might be a common cause of pain from the disc. They
noted that as the disc creeped under sustained loading, a
small loss of ﬂuid led to a large drop in pressure, and the com-
pression load was transferred to the middle to outer annulus
instead of the nucleus and inner annulus. They noted that the
posterior annulus is affected most because it is the narrowest
part of the disc and least able to sustain large compressive
strains. This situation would occur on rising after prolonged
ﬂexion. They also note that these stress concentration peaks
in the outer annulus can account for the observed collapse of
the inner annulus into the nucleus and that this is caused by
creep-related water loss from the nucleus.
In 1996, they wrote the following: “Pain originating from
either of these mechanisms would be expected to increase
Fig 14. Disc pressure (normalized at 0.51 mPa) is lower for the
same seat-back incline when using armrests.
Fig 13. Normalized (at 0.51 mPa) disc pressure decreases with
seat-back inclination and seat-bottom posterior tilt but increases
with use of thoracic support. Inside the parentheses, the ﬁrst value
is either 10 or 0 degrees for a support under the upper thoracic ver-
tebrae, and the second value, 0 or 6 degrees, is for seat-bottom pos-
terior tilt.

===== PAGE 11 =====

during the course of a day, especially in an individual who
had spent a considerable amount of time with his lumbar
spine ﬂexed, so that disc creep would have been unchecked
by the apophyseal joints. This would explain why prolonged
automobile driving is so closely associated with back pain
and disc prolapse”.
121
In 1997, Hedman and Fernie 122 studied anterior column
forces and articular facet forces in the lumbar spine during
sitting. They attempted to determine the relationship
between seated forces and the mechanical responses in lum-
bar tissues. They loaded whole lumbar spines (L1-S1) in
two postures, ﬂexed and extended. Their results suggested a
mechanism of force balancing in lordotic postures under sta-
tic loads, whereas flexed postures produced large increases
in the tensile forces in the posterior annulus.
Thus after 1996 the literature agrees that sitting with a
lordotic lumbar spine is the preferred position. We now
focus our attention on head and neck position.
Forward Head Position
From biomechanical123 and epidemiologic studies, 124,125
strains on the cervical spine in the sitting position appeared to
be related to increased forward inclination of the head. A for-
ward position of the head can occur from anterior translation,
forward ﬂexion (x-axis rotation), or a combination of both. To
understand forces on the cervical spine in sitting, it is neces-
sary to review the cervical coupling patterns for anterior head
translation and forward ﬂexion. Also, the position of the cen-
ter of gravity of the head will be important for discussing
forces on the cervical spine in various sitting positions.
The location of the center of gravity of the head has been
debated. Dempster
126 used volumetry to study the center of
gravity of the head in 1955. Using only two cadavers,
Biraune and Fischer
127 located the center of gravity of the
head behind the sella turcica. Clauser et al 54 presented a
thorough review of the literature for various body part cen-
ters of mass in 1969, with center of mass of the head located
at the sella turcica. In 1986, Vital and Senegas
128 used a sus-
pension technique to locate the head center of gravity of 6
cadavers “behind the sella turcica, above and slightly in
front of the external auditory meatus.”
They claimed that the nasion-opisthion reference line is
the true normal orientation of the head because suspension
makes this line horizontal (Fig 15). They determined that the
center of gravity is the midpoint of the nasion-inion line (Fig
15, C). They also claimed that when the nasion-opisthion
line is horizontal, it causes a 30-degree declined gaze posi-
tion, which is formed by a perpendicular line to the orbits
(Fig 15, D) and that this 30-degree declined position is rec-
ommended by ergonomists as a good working position.
In 1952, Kendall et al
43 described forward head posture as
the external auditory meatus positioned anterior to a vertical
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
604
Fig 15. Center of mass and neutral resting head posture. Vital and Senegas 128 found
that suspension will result in the nasion-opisthion reference line becoming horizontal
(A and B). Vital and Senegas located the center of gravity of the head at the midpoint of
the nasion-inion line, just posterior to the sella turcica (C). Vital and Senegas claim a
comfortable gaze angle is declined 30 degrees to the nasion-opisthion reference line,
when it is horizontal (D).
A B
C D

===== PAGE 12 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
605
postural line through the center of the shoulder joint.
Patients seen in pain clinics frequently have postural
faults.
35 Anterior head translation is one of these common
postural positions.129,130
Determination of anterior head translation is clinically
reliable. 131,132 In 1995, Haughie et al 133 showed that com-
puter-terminal workers, who had more pain than their
coworkers, had more anterior head translation, less range of
motion in extension, and more medical visits.
Many physical problems have been associated with for-
ward head posture, including the following: (1) increase of
upper cervical curvature (C1-C4); (2) decrease in lower cer-
vical curvature (C5-T1); (3) alteration of the upper thoracic
kyphosis; (4) protraction, elevation, and downward rotation
of the scapulae; (5) internal rotation of the humeri; and (6)
elevation of the ﬁrst and second ribs.
134-137
Penning, in 1978138 and 1995,139 was the ﬁrst to describe
changes in cervical lordosis with anterior-posterior head
translation. He reported that the upper segments (C1-C4)
extended while the lower cervical vertebrae (C5-T1) flexed
in anterior head translation. Hanten et al
46 have measured
resting head posture and total head excursion, which is for-
ward and backward head movement in translation, in 218
adults. For men, the average head excursion was 11.4 cm,
and for women, it was 10.0 cm.
Eklund et al
140 investigated head posture in drivers of fork
lifts, trucks, forestry machines, and cranes. They determined
that head axial rotation was a frequent cause of pain in these
workers and that forward head postures and forward body
positions occurred in bad lighting conditions.
Flexion of the cervical spine has been studied by many
investigators and recently by Dvorak et al.
141 Loss of cervi-
cal lordosis occurs in flexion, which causes increased disc
pressure and increased electromyographic readings in the
cervical musculature. However, the most important effect is
tension on the cervical spinal cord, brain stem, and nerve
roots.
142 Flexion is often found in desk workers and
typists. 143 Fig 16 illustrates attempts by ergonomists to
reduce back and neck stress with tilting seat bottoms and
tilting stands for reading materials. However, this position
still results in neck flexion. It will be shown in a later sec-
tion that this is a common problem for drivers of auto-
mobiles.
Consensus by Comfort Ratings
It is interesting to note that carefully designed ergonomic
chairs are often rejected by subjects in the workplace. In
1997, Christiansen
144 stated that “sitting comfort, a state of
physical well-being, is a personal sensation.” The feeling of
comfort cannot be measured directly, and often it has been
deduced from 3 principles: (1) the ﬁt of the chair to the sub-
ject’s body type, (2) the subject’s performance or behavior
while seated, and (3) the subject’s assessment of his or her
state of comfort (or discomfort). Although the electromyo-
graphic, disc-pressure, and radiographic studies previously
mentioned are examples of item 2, much research has gone
into items 1 and 3.
Body size and shape has been a topic of ergonomic
research for 100 years. Before adjustable chairs, work chairs
were made to fit the 50th percentile in body size. For an
example of body dimensional research in 1997, Greil
145
studied 42,000 Germans, aged from birth to 70 years.
Percentiles of trunk-cephalic height, trunk length, depth of
lower trunk, maximum sitting breadth, vertical thigh diame-
ter, lower leg and foot length, backrest-heel distance, and
additive arm length were presented by sex, age, and type of
body shape.
In each category (items 1-3) there are researchers who
are adamant that their particular assessment for proper sit-
ting posture is the best. For example, in 1969, Shackel et
al
146 stated that “a further and conclusive reason for our
concentrating upon subjective measures is inherent in the
context of studying chair comfort in relation to individual
users choosing for themselves, namely the ultimate criteri-
on must be the subjective judgment of a representative sam-
ple of users.”
Comfort ratings come in a variety of methods.
146-148 For
a modern statistical analysis, Helander and Zhang149 studied
comfort and discomfort in sitting. Genaidy and Karwowski150
presented a review of constrained body postures and devia-
tions from the neutral posture over a long period while work-
ing. These postures have been associated with discomfort,
pain, disc degeneration, high risk of arthritis, inﬂammation of
tendon sheaths, muscle spasms, and general pain.
People generally avoid static positions for prolonged peri-
ods by frequently moving while standing and sitting. In
1967, Branton and Grayson
151 observed that people fre-
quently change positions while waiting at train stations.
They noted that certain postures (eg, leg crossing) occur sig-
nificantly more often and for longer durations. In 1969,
Branton
152 provided a review of 45,000 sitting observations,
Fig 16. Ergonomic chairs and reading material stands reduce but
do not eliminate neck ﬂexion.

===== PAGE 13 =====

including time-lapse films, and concluded that chairs must
allow for changes in position. Branton pointed out that this
frequent movement of sitters is not just an “urge to move”
but that certain postures occur more frequently for specific
types of chairs and for tall versus short people. Branton
noted that, by speeding up time-lapse ﬁlms of sitters, certain
sequences of postural changes occurred at least 12 to 16
times during 5-hour periods.
Branton
145 categorized sitting postures into 4 groups,
which were described as follows: (1) minimal support de-
rived from seat (3.3% of time, 3 minutes in duration); (2) full
back support from seat and armrests (49.5% of time, 15 min-
utes in duration); (3) slumped. with some support from seat
and armrests (23.4% of time, 11 minutes in duration); and (4)
all other postures (23.8%, 5 minutes in duration). He noted
that people often need to extend their legs and cross their an-
kles, which appeared to be a stabilizing position for the pelvis
similar to crossing the knees. Change of position is thought
to reduce ischemia of the tissues, but then the long duration
of certain postures is unexplained.
In general, our cited references published before 1950*
are opinion papers based on the best estimates of ergonom-
ics, biomechanics, and observations. However, most of the
references on posture
32-36,39-50 and spinal modeling51-74 have
reliability, validity, precise engineering measurements,
and/or clinical data with statistics. The studies on sitting bio-
mechanics,
75-81 seat design, 82-83,90-104 and optimal seated
posture105-116 are mostly recent articles with multiple sub-
jects and clinical statistics with electromyographic data. The
articles cited for lumbar lordosis versus kyphosis in the seat-
ed position
117,118,120-122 have biomechanical measurements
in laboratories, whereas the citations on forward head pos-
ture
123-143 are large population clinical studies or random-
ized clinical trials. The studies on comfort ratings in sitting
positions are based on patient questionnaires with statistical
evaluations.
CONCLUSION
Sitting biomechanics has a long history in the literature.
Posture and lower extremity positions have been reviewed
here with the neglect of upper extremity positions, which
can be found in the ergonomics literature. Since 1970, elec-
tromyography and disc-pressure studies have settled some
debates about the ideal sitting position. Oftentimes, the the-
oretic ideal chair and sitting position are not preferred by
subjects’ comfort ratings.
Lumbar supports, armrests, seat-back inclination, freedom
to move, freedom to cross the knees or ankles, adjustable
heights of chairs, curved anterior seat bottom to reduce pres-
sure on the popliteal area, and minimal anterior translation
and/or ﬂexion of the head have been shown to reduce sitting
stress and to be associated with higher comfort ratings. By
using electromyographic results and internal disc pressures,
the optimum seat-back angle appears to be 120 degrees from
horizontal, whereas the seat-bottom optimum appears to be
approximately 0 to 10 degrees posteriorly inclined. The lum-
bar support optimum appears to be 5 cm of protrusion from
the seat back. The seat height should be less than the distance
from knee to feet to eliminate pressure on the posterior
popliteal area. The special subject of optimal seating in a car
seat will be the subject of part II of this review.
REFERENCES
1. Staffel F. Zur Hygiene des sitzens. Zbl F Allg Gesund-
heitspﬂege 1884;3:403-21.
2. Fick R. Spezielle gelenkund muskelmechanik. Handbuch der
Anatomie und Mechanik der Gelenke. Jena: Gustav Fischer;
1911. p. 688.
3. Strasser H. Die Rumfhaltungen. In: Lehrbuch der muskel und
gelenkmechanik, chapter VI. V ol. 2. Berlin: Springer; 1913. p.
244-320.
4. Schede F. Grundlagen der korperlichen eriziehung. Stuttgart:
F. Enke; 1935. p. 154.
5. Drescher EW. Arbeitssitz und arbeitplatz. Reichsarbeitsblatt
III; 1929. p. 159-75.
6. Akerbloom B. Standing and sitting posture. Stockholm: AB
Nordiska Bokhandein; 1948.
7. Keegan JJ. Alterations of the lumbar curve related to posture
and seating. J Bone Joint Surg 1953;35-A:589-603.
8. Keegan JJ. Evaluation and improvement of seats. Indust Med
Surg 1962:137-48.
9. Knutsson B, Lindh K, Telhag H. Sitting-an electromyograph-
ic and mechanical study. Acta Othop Scand 1966;37:415-28.
10. Kroemer KHE. Seating in plant and office. Am Ind Hyg
Assoc J 1971;32:636-51.
11. Nachemson A, Elfstrom G. Intravital dynamic pressure mea-
surements in lumbar discs. A study of common movements,
maneuvers and exercises. Scand J Rehabil Med 1970;
1(Suppl):1-40.
12. Andersson BJG, Ortengren R, Nachemson A, Elfstrom G.
Lumbar disc pressure and myoelectric back muscle activity
during sitting. I. Studies on an experimental chair. Scand J
Rehabil Med 1974;6:104-14.
13. Andersson BJG, Ortengren R, Nachemson A, Elfstrom G.
Lumbar disc pressure and myoelectric back muscle activity
during sitting. II. Studies on an office chair. Scand J Rehabil
Med 1974;6:115-21.
14. Andersson BJG, Ortengren R. Lumbar disc pressure and
myoelectric back muscle activity during sitting. III. Studies
on a wheel chair. Scand J Rehabil Med 1974;6:122-7.
15. Andersson BJG, Ortengren R, Nachemson A, Elfstrom G.
Lumbar disc pressure and myoelectric back muscle activity
during sitting. IV . Studies on a car driver’s seat. Scand J
Rehabil Med 1974;6:128-33.
16. Andersson BJG, Ortengren R, Nachemson A, Elfstrom G,
Broman H. The sitting posture: an electromyographic and dis-
cometric study. Orthop Clin North Am 1975;6:105-19.
17. Society of Automobile Engineers. Motor vehicle seating man-
ual. Warrendale (PA): SAE; 1980.
18. Williams MM, Hawley JA, McKenzie RA, Wijmem PM. A
comparison of the effects of two sitting postures on back and
referred pain. Spine 1991;16:1185-91.
19. Fubini E. The interaction between technical requirements and
comfort in car seating. Coll Antropol 1997;21:405-27.
20. Parow W. Studien uber die physikalischen bedingungen der
aufrechten stellung und der normalen krummung der wirbel-
saule. Arch Anat Physiol 1864;31:74-110, 223-55.
21. von Meyer H. Das aufrechte stehen. Arch Anat Physiol
1853:9-44.
22. von Meyer H. Das sitzen mit gekreuzen oberschenkeln und
dessen moglichen folgen. Arch Anat Physiol 1890;14:204-8.
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
606
*References 1-6, 20-22, 25, 28, 37, 38, 84-89, 96.

===== PAGE 14 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
607
23. Snijders CJ, Slagter AH, van Strik R, Vleeming A, Stoeckart
R, Stam HJ. Why leg crossing? The inﬂuence of common pos-
tures on abdominal muscle activity. Spine 1995;20:1989-93.
24. Marumoto T, Sotoyama M, Villanueva MBG, Jonai H,
Yamada H, Kanai A, et al. Correlation analysis between visu-
al acuity and sitting postural parameters of young students. J
Jpn Ophthalmol Soc 1997;101:393-9.
25. Spitzy H. Die korperliche erziehung des kindes. 2nd ed.
Wien; 1926. p. 424.
26. Lord MJ, Small JM, Dinsay JM, Watkins RG. Lumbar lordo-
sis. Effects of sitting and standing. Spine 1997;22:2571-4.
27. Coleman N, Hull BP, Ellitt G. An empirical study of preferred
settings for lumbar support on adjustable office chairs.
Ergonomics 1998;41:401-9.
28. Hooton EA. A survey in seating. Cambridge (MA): Gardner;
1945. p. 101.
29. Floyd WF, Roberts DF. Anatomical and physiological princi-
ples in chair and table design. Ergonomics 1958;8:1-16.
30. Reinecke SM, Hazard RG, Coleman K. Continuous passive
motion in seating: A new strategy against low back pain. J
Spinal Disord 1994;7:29-35.
31. Hetzberg HTE. Comfort tests of a pulsating seat cushion and
lumbar pad. Wright-Patterson AFB (OH): Air Material
Command; 1949. Publication No. MCREXD 695-82.
32. Dietz V . Human neuronal control of automatic functional
movements: interaction between central programs and affer-
ent input. Physiol Rev 1992;72:33-69.
33. Hadders-Algra M, Brogren E, Forssberg H. Ontogeny of pos-
tural adjustments during sitting in infancy: variation, selec-
tion and modulation. J Physiol 1996;493:273-88.
34. Kuchera M. Gravitational stress, musculoligamentous strain,
and postural alignment. Spine: state of the art reviews.
1995;9:463-89.
35. Woodhull AM, Maltrud K, Mello BL. Alignment of the
human body in standing. Eur J Appl Physiol 1985;54:109-15.
36. Wells KF, Luttgens K. Kinesiology: scientiﬁc basis of human
motion. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1976.
37. Du Bois Reymond R. Specielle muskelphysioogie oder bewe-
gungslehre. Berlin: Hirschwuld; 1903.
38. Hellebrant FA, Tepper RH, Braun CL, Elliott MC. The loca-
tion of the cardinal anatomical orientation planes passing
through the center of weight in young adult women. Am J
Physiol 1938;121:465-70.
39. Hellebrandt FA, Hirt S, Fries EC. Centre of gravity of the
human body. Arch Phys Ther 1944;25:465-70.
40. May J. The placement of the gravity line on the human body
in the anterior-posterior plane and its relationship to posture
by roentgenoscopic study [thesis]. Iowa: State University of
Iowa; 1955.
41. Klausen K. The form and function of the loaded human spine.
Acta Physiol Scand 1965;65:176-90.
42. Kapandji AI. The physiology of the joints. V ol. 3. New York:
Churchill Livingstone; 1974. p. 15.
43. Kendall HO, Kendall FP, Boynton DA. Posture and pain.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1952.
44. McKenzie RA. The lumbar spine: mechanical diagnosis and
therapy. Waikanae, New Zealand: Spinal Publications; 1981.
45. Smidt GL, Day JW, Gerleman DG. Iowa anatomical position
system. A method of assessing posture. Eur J Appl Physiol
1984;52:407-13.
46. Hanten WP, Lucio RM, Russell JL, Brunt D. Assessment of
total head excursion and resting head posture. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil 1991;72:877-80.
47. Bullock-Saxton J. Postural alignment in standing: a repeat-
able study. Australian J Physiotherapy 1993;39:25-9.
48. Mosner EA, Bryan JM, Stull MA, Shippee R. A comparison
of actual and apparent lumbar lordosis in black and white
adult females. Spine 1989;14:310-4.
49. Johnson GM. The correlation between surface measurements
of head and neck posture and the anatomic position of the
upper cervical vertebrae. Spine 1998;23:921-7.
50. Refshauge KM, Goodsell M, Lee M. The relationship
between surface contour and vertebral body measures of
upper spine curvature. Spine 1994;19:2180-5.
51. Hess JL, Lumbard CF. Theoretical investigations of dynamic
response of man to high vertical accelerations. J Aviation
Med 1958;29:66-75.
52. King AI. A review of biomechanical models. J Biomech Eng
1984;106:97-104.
53. Yoganandan N, Myclebust JB, Ray G, Sances A Jr. Mathemat-
ical and ﬁnite element analysis of spine injuries. Crit Rev Bio-
med Eng 1987;15:29-93.
54. Clauser CE, McConville JT, Young JW. Weight, volume, and
center of mass of segments of the human body. Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base (OH): Aerospace Medical Research
Library, Aerospace Medical Division, Air Force Systems
Command; 1969. Publication No. AMRL-TR-69-70.
55. Belytschko T, Privitzer E. Refinement and validation of a
three-dimensional head-spine model. Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base (OH): Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory,
Aerospace Medical Division, Air Force Systems Command;
1978. Publication No. AMRL-TR-78-7.
56. Schultz AB, Galante JO. A mathematical model for the study
of the mechanics of the human vertebral column. J Biomech
1970;3:405-16.
57. Schultz AB, Miller JAA. Biomechanics of the human spine.
In: Mow VC, Hayes WC, editors. Basic orthopaedic biome-
chanics. New York: Raven Press; 1991. p. 337-74.
58. Schultz AB, Miller JAA. Biomechanics of the human spine.
In: Mow VC, Hayes WC, editors. Basic orthopaedic biome-
chanics. New York: Raven Press; 1997. p. 365.
59. Schultz AB. The use of mathematical models for studies of
scoliosis biomechanics. Spine 1991;16:1211-6.
60. Gore DR, Sepic SB, Ardner GM. Roentgenographic ﬁndings
of the cervical spine in asymptomatic people. Spine 1986;
6:521-4.
61. Yoganandan N, Kumaresan S, V oo L, Pintar FA. Spine Update.
Finite element applications in human cervical spine modeling.
Spine 1996;21:1824-34.
62. Goel VK, Clark C, McGowan D. An in vivo study of the kine-
matics of the normal, injured and stabilized cervical spine. J
Biomech 1984;17:363-76.
63. Goel VJ, Gilbertson LG. Spine update. Applications of the
ﬁnite element method to thoracolumbar spinal research-past,
present, and future. Spine 1995;20:1719-27.
64. Harrison DD, Janik TJ, Troyanovich SJ, Holland B.
Comparisons of lordotic cervical spine curvatures to a theo-
retical ideal model of the static sagittal cervical spine. Spine
1996;21:667-75.
65. Harrison DD, Janik TJ, Troyanovich SJ, Harrison DE, Colloca
CJ. Evaluation of the assumptions used to derive an ideal nor-
mal cervical spine model. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 1997;
10:202-13.
66. Harrison DD, Janik TJ. Clinical validation of an ideal normal
static cervical spine model. In: Witten M, editor. Compu-
tational medicine, public health, and biotechnology. V ol. 2.
Austin (TX): World Scientiﬁc Publishing; 1995. p. 1047-56.
67. Janik TJ, Harrison DD. Prediction of 2-D static normal posi-
tion of the cervical spine from mathematical modeling. In:
Witten M, editor. Computational medicine, public health, and
biotechnology. V ol. 2. Austin (TX): World Scientiﬁc Publish-
ing; 1995. p. 1035-46.
68. Stagnara P, De Mauroy JC, Dran G, Fonon GP, Costanzo G,
Dimnet J, et al. Reciprocal angulation of vertebral bodies in a
sagittal plane: approach to references for the evaluation of
kyphosis and lordosis. Spine 1982;7:335-42.

===== PAGE 15 =====

69. Bernhardt M, Bridwell KH. Segmental analysis of the sagittal
plane alignment of the normal thoracic and lumbar spines and
thoracolumbar junction. Spine 1989;14:717-21.
70. Troyanovich SJ, Calliet R, Janik TJ, Harrison DD, Harrison
DE. Radiographic mensuration characteristics of the sagittal
lumbar spine from a normal population with a method to syn-
thesize prior studies of lordosis. J Spinal Disord 1997;10:3806.
71. Harrison DD, Calliet R, Janik TJ, Troyanovich TJ, Harrison DE.
Elliptical modeling of the sagittal lumbar lordosis and segmen-
tal rotation angles as a method to discriminate between normal
and low back pain subjects. J Spinal Disord 1998;11:430-9.
72. Janik TJ, Harrison DD, Calliet R, Troyanovich TJ, Harrison
DE. Can the sagittal lumbar curvature be closely approximat-
ed by an ellipse? J Orthop Res 1998;16:766-70.
73. Harrison DE, Harrison DD, Troyanovich SJ. Reliability of
spinal displacement analysis on plane x-rays: a review of
commonly accepted facts and fallacies with implications for
chiropractic education and technique. J Manipulative Physiol
Ther 1998;21:252-66.
74. Mosner EA, Bryan JM, Stull MA, Shippee R. A comparison
of actual and apparent lumbar lordosis in black and white
adult females. Spine 1989;14:310-4.
75. Schoberth H. Sitzhaltung, sitzschaden, sitzmobel. Berlin:
Springer Verlag; 1962.
76. Lord MJ, Small JM, Dinsay JM, Watkins RG. Lumbar lordo-
sis. Effects of sitting and standing. Spine 1997;22:2571-4.
77. Yasukouchi A, Isayama T. The relationships between lumbar
curves, pelvic tilt, and joint mobilities in different sitting pos-
tures in young adults. Appl Human Sci 1995;14:15-21.
78. Stokes IAF, Avery JM. Inﬂuence of the hamstring muscles on
lumbar spine curvature in sitting. Spine 1980;5:525-8.
79. Bridger RS, Wilkinson D, Houweninge van T. Hip joint
mobility and spinal angles in standing and in different sitting
postures. Hum Factors 1989;31:229-41.
80. Black KM, McClure P, Polansky M. The influence of differ-
ent sitting positions on cervical and lumbar posture. Spine
1996;21:65-70.
81. Bendix T, Biering-sorensen F. Posture of the trunk when sit-
ting on forward inclining seats. Scand J Rehabil Med
1983;15:197-203.
82. Eastman MC, Kamon F. Posture and subjective evaluation at
ﬂat and slanted desks. Hum Factors 1976;18:15.
83. Grall TB. An experimental investigation of the quantitative ef-
fects of postural support on man’s systematic stress mechanism
during sustained visual task performance. Leichestershire,
England: Institute for Consumer Ergonomics, University of
Technology, Loughbourough; 1974.
84. Bennett HE. School posture and seating. Boston: Ginn; 1928.
85. Lay WF, Fisher LC. Riding comfort and cushions. Trans Soc
Automotive Engineers 1940;47:482-96.
86. Weddell AGM, Darcus HD. Some anatomical problems in
naval warfare. Br J Indust Med 1947;4:77-83.
87. Schultless W. Die pathologie und therapie der ruckgrats-
verkrummungen. In: Handbuch der orthopadischen chirurgie
von G. Joachimsthal. V ol. 2. Jena: 1905-1907. p. 487-1224.
88. Hooton FA. A survey in seating. Gardiner (MA): Heywood-
Wakeﬁeld Company; 1945.
89. Darcus HD, Weddell AGM. Some anatomical and physiologi-
cal principles concerned in the design of seats for naval war
weapons. Br Med Bull 1947;5:31-7.
90. Kroemer KHE. Seating in plant and office. Am Indust Hyg J
1971:635-51.
91. Ollefs HZ. Pressure distribution while sitting. Zeitschrift für
Orthopädie und ihre Grenzgebiete 1951;80:573.
92. Bush CA. Study on pressures on skin under ischial tuberosi-
ties and thighs during sitting. Arch Phys Med 1969;50:207.
93. Jurgens HW. Seat pressure distribution. Coll Antropol 1997;
21:359-66.
94. Brienza DM, Chung KC, Brubaker CE, Wang J, Karg TE, Lin
CT. A system for the analysis of seat support surfaces shape
control and simultaneous measurement of applied pressures.
IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 1996;4:103-13.
95. Swearingen JJ, Wheelwright CD, Garner JD. An analysis of sit-
ting areas and pressures in man. Oklahoma City (OK): US Civil
Aero-Medical Research Institute; 1962. Report No. 62-1.
96. Morant GM. Dimensional requirements for seats in R.A.F.
aircraft. Flying Personnel Research Committee; 1947. Report
No. 682.
97. Majeske C, Buchanan C. Quantitative description of two sit-
ting postures with and without a lumbar support pillow. Phys
Ther 1984;64:1531-3.
98. Grauer JN, Panjabi MM, Cholewicki J, Nibu K, Dvorak J.
Whiplash produces an S-shaped curvature of the neck with
hyperextension at lower levels. Spine 1997;22:2489-94.
99. Floyd WF, Ward JS. Anthropometric and physiological con-
siderations in school, ofﬁce, and factory seating. In: Grandjean
E, editor. Sitting posture. London: Taylor & Francis Ltd; 1969.
p. 18-25.
100. Galante JO. Tensile properties of the human lumbar annulus
ﬁbrosus. Acta Orthop Scand 1967;100(Suppl).
101. Kapandji IA. L’anatomie fonctionelle du rachis lombo-sacre.
Acta Orthop Belg 1969;35:543.
102. Parke WW, Schiff DC. The applied anatomy of the interverte-
bral disc. Orthop Clin North Am 1971;2:309.
103. Nac hemson A. Lumbar intradiscal pressure. Experimental
studies on post mortem material. Acta Orthop Scand
1960;43(Suppl).
104. Nac hemson A. The influence of spinal movements on the
lumbar intradiscal pressure and on the tensile stresses in the
annulus ﬁbrosus. Acta Orthop Scand 1963;33:183.
105. Lundervold AJS. Electromyographic investigation of position
and manner of working in typewriting. Acta Physiol Scand
1951;84(Suppl).
106. Lundervold AJS. Electromyographic investigation during
typewriting. Ergonomics 1958;1:226.
107. Basmajian JV , Bentzon JW. Electromyographic study of cer-
tain muscles of the leg and foot in the standing position. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 1954;98:662-6.
108. Basmajian JV . Electromyography of iliopsoas. Anat Rec
1958;130:267.
109. Floyd WF, Silver PHS. The function of the erector spinae
muscles in certain movements and postures in man. J Physiol
1955;129:184-203.
110. Joseph J, Nightingale A. Electromyography of muscles of
posture: leg muscles in males. J Physiol 1952;117:484-91.
111. Joseph J, Nightingale A. Electromyography of muscles of
posture: thigh muscles in males. J Physiol 1954;126:81-5.
112. Joseph J, Nightingale A. Electromyography of muscles of
posture: leg and thigh muscles in women, including the
effects of high heels. J Physiol 1956;132:465-8.
113. Joseph J, Nightingale A, Williams PL. A detailed study of the
electric potentials recorded over some postural muscles while
relaxed and standing. J Physiol 1955;127:617-25.
114. Joseph J, Williams PL. Electromyography of certain hip mus-
cles. J Anat 1957;91:286-94.
115. Carlsoo S. The static muscle load in different work positions:
an electromyographic study. Ergonomics 1961;4:193-211.
116. Brattgard SO. Design of wheelchairs and wheelchair service
based on scientiﬁc research. Readaption 1969;162:11.
117. Adams MA, Hutton WC. The effect of posture on the fluid
content of lumbar intervertebral discs. Spine 1983;8:665-71.
118. Dolan P, Adams MA, Hutton WC. Commonly adopted postures
and their effect on the lumbar spine. Spine 1988;13:197-200.
119. Fahrni WH, Trueman GE. Comparative radiological study of
the spines of a primitive population with North Americans
and North Europeans. J Bone Joint Surg 1965;47B:552-5.
Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
608

===== PAGE 16 =====

Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics
Volume 22 • Number 9 • November/December 1999
Sitting Biomechanics Part I • Harrison et al
609
120. Adams MA, Dolan P. Recent advances in lumbar spinal
mechanics and their clinical signiﬁcance. Clin Biomechanics
1995;10:3-19.
121. Adams MA, McMillan DW, Green TP, Dolan P. Sustain load-
ing generates stress concentrations in lumbar intervertebral
discs. Spine 1996;21:434-8.
122. Hedman TP, Fernie GR. Mechanical response of the lumbar
spine to seated postural loads. Spine 1997;22:734-43.
123. Less M, Eihelberg W. Force changes in neck vertebrae and
muscles. In: Komi P, editor. Biomechanics. V ol. V-A. Balti-
more: University Park Press; 1976. p. 530-6.
124. Ferguson D. Posture aching and body build in telephonists. J
Hum Ergol 1976;5:183-6.
125. Hunting W, Grandjean E, Maeda K. Constrained postures in
accounting machine operators. Appl Ergol 1980;11:145-9.
126. Dempster WT. Space requirements for the seated operator.
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base (OH): Aerospace Medical
Research Library, Aerospace Medical Division, Air Force Sys-
tems Command; 1955. W ADC Technical Report No. 55159.
127. Biraune W, Fischer O. On the center of gravity of the human
body. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1985.
128. Vital JM, Senegas J. Anatomical bases of the study of the con-
straints to which the cervical spine is subject in the sagittal
plane. A study of the center of gravity of the head. Surg
Radiol Anat 1986;8:169-73.
129. McKenzie RA. The cervical and thoracic spine: mechanical
diagnosis and therapy. Waikanae, New Zealand: Spinal Publi-
cations; 1990.
130. Lennon JM, Shealy CN, Cady RK, Matta W, Cox R, Simpson
WF. Postural and respiratory modulation of autonomic func-
tion, pain, and health. Am J Pain Manage 1994;4:36-9.
131. Garrett TR,Youdas JW, Madson TJ. Reliability of measuring for-
ward head posture in a clinical setting. JOSPT 1993;17:155-60.
132. Lundstrom F, Lundstrom A. Natural head position as a basis
for cephalometric analysis. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthod
1992;101:244-7.
133. Haughie LJ. Fiebert IM, Roach KE. Relationship of forward
head posture and cervical backward bending to neck pain. J
Manual Manip Ther 1995;3:91-7.
134. Lafferty-Braun B, Amundson LR. Quantitative assessment of
head and shoulder posture. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1989;
70:322-9.
135. Ayub E, Glasheen-Wray M, Kraus S. Head posture: a case
study of the effects of the rest position of the mandible.
JOSPT 1984;8:179-83.
136. Dar nell MW. A proposed chronology of events for forward
head posture. J Craniomand Prac 1983;1:49-54.
137. Saunders HD, Saunders R. Evaluation, treatment and preven-
tion of musculoskeletal disorders. V ol. 1. Minnesota: Educa-
tional Opportunities; 1993.
138. Penning L. Normal movements of the cervical spine. Am J
Roentgenol 1978;130:317-26.
139. Penning L. Kinematics of cervical spine injury. A functional
radiological hypothesis. Eur Spine J 1995;4:126-32.
140. Eklund J, Odenrick P, Zettergren S, Johansson H. Head posture
measurements among work vehicle drivers and implications
for work and workplace design. Ergonomics 1994;37:623-39.
141. Dvorak J, Panjabi MM, Novotny JE, Antinnes JA. In vivo
flexion/extension of the normal cervical spine. J Orthop Res
1991;9:828-34.
142. Br eig A. Adverse mechanical tension in the central nervous
system. Analysis of cause and effect. Relief by functional
neurosurgery. New York: John Wiley and Sons; 1978.
143. Bendix T. Trunk posture and load on the trapezius muscle
whilst sitting at sloping desks. Ergonomics 1984;27:873-82.
144. Christiansen K. Subjective assessment of sitting comfort. Coll
Antropol 1997;21:387-95.
145. Greil H. Ontogenetic aspects of dimensions and proportions
in sitting posture. Coll Antropol 1997;21:367-86.
146. Shackel B, Chidsey KD, Shipley P. The assessment of chair
comfort. Ergonomics 1969;12:269-306.
147. Barkla DM. Chair angles, duration of sitting, and comfort rat-
ings. Ergonomics 1964;7:297-304.
148. Cor lett EN, Bishop RP. A technique for assessing postural
discomfort. Ergonomics 1976;19:175-82.
149. Helander MG, Zhang L. Field studies of comfort and discom-
fort in sitting. Ergonomics 1997;40:895-915.
150. Genaidy AM, Karwowski W. The effects of neutral posture
deviations on perceived joint discomfort ratings in sitting and
standing postures. Ergonomics 1993;36:785-92.
151. Branton P, Grayson G. An evaluation of train seats by obser-
vation of sitting behavior. Ergonomics 1967;10:35-51.
152. Br anton P. Behavior, body mechanics and discomfort.
Ergonomics 1969;12:316-27.